We are pleased to present a career-spanning exhibition of works by Robert Mapplethorpe curated by artist Arthur Jafa. Comprised of both the iconic studio photographs that are synonymous with Mapplethorpe's oeuvre as well as a selection of his rarely exhibited Polaroids, Jafa employs the visual sequencing found throughout his own work to reconfigure and destabilize our understanding of the familiar. Orbiting around the concept that re-oriented chains of connotation imbue culturally entrenched imagery with new narrative power, Jafa proposes a fresh reading of works that have long been embraced as art-historical canon. Breaching the tacit barricades that quarantine Mapplethorpe's classically composed studio work from his notoriously unmitigated depictions of gay sexuality, Jafa's image selection spans the full arc of Mapplethorpe's practice. Silver gelatin portraits and still-lifes are displayed with a series of Polaroids that fluctuate between the tender and the transgressive, all of which are granted equal footing in Jafa's hierarchy-leveling hands. Suggesting that visual information can supply narrative meaning in much the same way as a text, Jafa's sequencing re-examines the issues of agency and power that reverberate throughout both Mapplethorpe's work and his own. Of particular interest to Jafa is the literal and metaphorical space between Mapplethorpe and his subjects, the delicate balance between intimacy and formalism that often charges the photographer's imagery. Sam Wagstaff is here presented as both a lover and public figure—an object of erotic desire and a revered mentor whose varying depictions in Mapplethorpe's work trespass simultaneously on the public and the private. Portraits of celebrated artists are confronted with the anonymous gazes of reclining nudes, while lush landscapes abut with landscapes of the body. Each choice made by Mapplethorpe is met by one from Jafa, resulting in a series of choreographed interactions between the two artists. Echoing Mapplethorpe's practice of constructing narrative threads throughout his oeuvre via framing, cropping, and comparison (the flower mirrors human genitalia because the eye locates the logic in this proposition), Jafa's use of sequencing as a rhetorical device examines not only Mapplethorpe's formal practice but the dynamic emotional and social implications of authorship itself. Robert Mapplethorpe (1946-1989) was born and raised in Queens, New York. He attended the Pratt Institute in Brooklyn from 1963 to 1969, where he majored in Graphic Arts and worked primarily in painting, sculpture, and collage. It was not until the 1970s when the artist Sandy Daley gave Mapplethorpe a Polaroid camera that he began to experiment with photography, which he originally used as a means to document his mixed-media artworks, and develop his signature style. During his lifetime, Mapplethorpe had impressive solo exhibitions at some of the most acclaimed institutions around the world, including the Institute of Contemporary Art, Philadelphia; the Museum of Contemporary Art, Chicago; the National Portrait Gallery, London; the Stedelijk Museum, Amsterdam; and the Whitney Museum of American Art, New York. After his untimely death from AIDS in 1989, Mapplethorpe has been the subject of solo exhibitions at major international museums, including the Galleria dell'Accademia, Florence, Italy; Grand Palais, Paris, France; Musée Rodin, Paris, France; Moderna Museet, Stockholm, Sweden; Musée des beaux-arts de Montréal, Canada; and State Hermitage Museum, St. Petersburg, Russia. In 2016, Mapplethorpe was the subject of a major touring retrospective, The Perfect Medium, which opened at the J. Paul Getty Museum and Los Angeles County Museum of Art (LACMA), Los Angeles, and toured to Montreal Museum of Fine Arts, Canada and the Art Gallery of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia. In 2019, Mapplethorpe was the subject of Implicit Tensions: Mapplethorpe Now, a year-long exhibition yearlong exhibition project in two parts at the Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum in New York.

We are pleased to present "Vivian Suter: Wolf's Hour," an exhibition of mixed media paintings from more than thirty years of the artist's career. This show is Suter's second presentation with Gladstone Gallery, and her first in Belgium. Expanding the artist's investigation of using the painted medium to create surreal, immersive environments, Suter employs the gallery's classic architecture to transpose elements of her tropical studio onto the urban setting of this Belgian townhouse. The walls, ceiling, stairwell, and floor all find activation through the unique installation of unstretched canvases that simultaneously highlight and conceal the rectilinear components of the exhibition space. While conceived and created as unique, individual works, each painting on view is part and parcel with Suter's artistic macrocosm, in which compositions find infinitely new relevance depending on their placement over, alongside, across, and underneath one another. This permission for recontextualization similarly democratizes Suter's work for all viewers, allowing for different permutations and transformations with each new installation of the artist's paintings. Since the mid-1980s, Suter's home and studio has been based in the lush climate of the Guatemalan lowlands. Abstracted components of the artist's surroundings find their way onto the untreated canvases, both figuratively and literally: painterly references to natural forms such as tree canopies, volcanic peaks, and placid lakes exist in company with gestural markings from rain water, eroded soil, and animal tracks. Suter's admission of natural phenomena into her oeuvre not only undercuts the notion of a material hierarchy, but also offers an ecologically conscious form of existence, with the biological world acting in tandem with the artist's hand. Vivian Suter was born in Buenos Aires, Argentina; studied in Basel, Switzerland; and currently lives and works in Panajachel, Guatemala. Solo exhibitions of the artist's work have been held at numerous international institutions, including: Brücke Museum, Berlin; Camden Arts Centre, London; Tate Liverpool, United Kingdom; Institute of Contemporary Art, Boson, Massachusetts; Musée d'Art Moderne Grand-Duc Jean, Luxembourg; The Power Plant, Toronto; Art Institute of Chicago, Illinois; Jewish Museum, New York; Kunsthalle Basel, Switzerland; Kunstmuseum Olten, Switzerland; and Kunstmuseum des Kantons Thurgau, Kartause Ittingen, Warth, Switzerland. A public installation of Suter's paintings is currently on view in Coachella Valley, California as part of the 2021 iteration of "Desert X," and in the coming year, solo presentations of Suter's works will be staged at Museo Nacional Centro de Arte Reina Sofía, Madrid and Kunstmuseum Luzern, Switzerland.

We are pleased to announce an exhibition by Shirin Neshat and the New York premiere of the artist's latest body of work, Land of Dreams. Comprised of more than 100 photographs and a two-channel film installation, Land of Dreams marks a significant visual and conceptual shift for the artist, who has turned her lens to the landscape and people of the American West. For this exhibition, Neshat will present the entire collection of photographs from this series as well as both films, which will be complemented by an online viewing room and virtual screenings throughout the show's run. Combining Neshat's singular artistic language with her intuitive approach to documenting the subjects she photographs, Land of Dreams presents multifaceted, surreal views into contemporary American culture during the Trump era.Created in 2019 in New Mexico, Land of Dreams is a multidisciplinary project, both fictitious and documentary in nature, that captures the state's diverse American population. The first film on the two-channel video installation follows a young Iranian art student named Simin, who travels around suburban and rural areas of New Mexico photographing local residents in their homes. As part of the protagonist's assignment, Simin asks her subjects about their most recent dreams. As the people she encounters vividly detail their dreams, the viewer is transported into these imagined narratives alongside Simin, who wanders inside each participant's subconscious mind. Neshat infuses the film with cinematic views of New Mexico's sublime landscape alongside the everyday streets and neighborhoods where Simin travels. The second film reveals a sinister twist to the protagonist's seemingly innocuous assignment: Simin is uncovered as an Iranian spy tasked with archiving the dreams and portraits she captures, which are recorded and analyzed in a bunker set within the mountains of New Mexico. Unlike the dozens of dream scientists who quietly work and diligently follow orders in the factory-like facility, Simin is noticeably perplexed by one of her subjects, leading her on a path to try and find their subliminal connection. Through her incisive ability to allude to the absurdities and similarities between the United States and Iran, Neshat astutely explores the complexities between the ephemeral nature of dreams and the dangerous impact of oppressive political ideologies and policies to reveal a shared humanity.Alongside the film, the photographic installation Land of Dreams comprises 111 photographs of New Mexico residents who Neshat captured throughout filming. Similarly to Simin, Neshat asked her subjects about their dreams, which she recorded in Farsi on many of the portraits, along with the sitters' names and dates and places of birth. The artist's practice of applying calligraphy to portraits recurs throughout her oeuvre, and in many of these new photographs, Neshat additionally included technically intricate, ornate drawings that depict fantastical elements of the dreams. The artist notes, "We drove across the country to search for a landscape that at once looked like Iran and America's Southwest. We settled on New Mexico not only for its spectacular nature but also for its demographically diverse communities of Native Americans, African Americans, Hispanic, and Anglos." Through making these complex and interwoven works, Neshat formed a deep interpersonal connection with each person she met, resulting in a powerful and encompassing portrait of America. Shirin Neshat is an Iranian-born artist and filmmaker living in New York. In 2019, Neshat was the subject of a retrospective exhibition, "Shirin Neshat: I Will Greet the Sun Again" at The Broad, Los Angeles, which will travel to The Modern Art Museum of Fort Worth on February 19 and remain on view through May 16, 2021. She has mounted numerous solo exhibitions at museums internationally, including: ARoS Aarhus Art Museum, Copenhagen; Musée de l'Eysée, Lausanne, Switzerland; National Gallery of Victoria, Melbourne, Australia; Glenstone Museum, Potomac, Maryland; Kunstraum Dornbirn, Dornbirn, Austria; Kunsthalle Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany; Museo Correr, Venice, Italy; the Hirshhorn Museum and Sculpture Garden, Washington D.C.; Stedelijk Museum, Amsterdam; the Serpentine Gallery, London; Hamburger Bahnhof, Berlin; and the Musée d'art contemporain de Montréal. A major retrospective of her work was exhibited at the Detroit Institute of Arts in 2013. Neshat was awarded the Golden Lion Award, the First International Prize at the 48th Biennale di Venezia (1999), the Hiroshima Freedom Prize (2005), the Dorothy and Lillian Gish Prize (2006), and the Praemium Imperiale Prize (2017). In 2009, Neshat directed her first feature-length film, Women Without Men, which received the Silver Lion Award for "Best Director" at the 66th Venice International Film Festival. Neshat is currently completing her third feature-length film, entitled Land of Dreams, marking the first time she has created a body of work that incorporates photography, video, and a feature film. Land of Dreams will be released in 2021 and features actors such as Matt Dillon, Sheila Vand, Isabella Rossellini, Christopher McDonald, and Anna Gunn. Video The Making of Shirin Neshat's "Land of Dreams" ● ● ● The Making of Shirin Neshat's "Land of Dreams" is a 25 minute documentary created by The Artist Profile Archive chronicling Shirin Neshat's creation of this latest body of work. It was included in Shirin Neshat: I Will Greet the Sun Again, the artist's retrospective originally presented at The Broad from October 19, 2019 to February 16, 2020, and soon to open at the Modern Art Museum of Fort Worth from February 19 to May 16, 2021

UNTITLED (IF I COULD TOUCH YOUR BODY)I don't know anything about David Rappeneau and nor does anybody else here. This is OK. It means there's only the luxurious mystery of his new paintings to contemplate without any extraneous interpretative trash, much like how you experience God's creation (if S/He/They exist) without any backstory spelt out in the stars. Religious questions, matters of faith, are inescapable: maybe because ††††††††††††††††††††††††††† is the only title here, a mini-Golgotha; maybe because they're paintings of vulnerable flesh on show in the midst of a plague. Given the stylistic kinkiness of the bodies he offers us— the hypertrophic femme boy oozing over a car in what could be a Balenciaga ad; the descendent of Storm from X-Men lording over the desolate city with her pack of rabid gargoyles— Rappeneau could be Egon Schiele rebooted, or Arthur Rackham with a thing for anime and faery girl accounts on Tumblr. He isn't a dead Victorian gentleman but he offers a similar fantasy version of the body: weird, skeletal, with trippy proclivities for distortion and 8K physical detail. His paintings are also littered with the neon garbage of now (iMessages in kanji, bags full of stolen Hermès, vape wands): stuff which makes us feel at home (and simultaneously kind of spooked) in this freaky parallel universe. Or that just might be a description of 2020…Like Dürer, who was also hot for sinister hyperrealistic renderings of flesh and bone, he knows angels aren't just dreamy creatures who emit divine light pollution. The angel sheltering a sick boy in his wings by starlight looks depressive, too, chained by who knows what earthly sorrow: Melancholia I for the time of Xanax. Rappeneau's scenes of empty streets suggest a freaked-out memory of lockdown: house and sky in a weird swirl, trees gone 😱. But the city is sometimes stalked by giant youths like heartbroken Godzillas: they dwarf the cathedrals that surround them. This apocalyptic power fantasy will be familiar to anybody who's ingested anime such as Neon Genesis Evangelion where teenagers and alien beings known as Angels attack a futuristic version of Tokyo.Mutating flesh, narcotics, melancholy and the infinite sadness: the traditional stuff of youth. Rappeneau's depictions of trashed, wan, androgynous kids probably couldn't exist without the grungy subversion of fashion photography that happened in the 1990s. R.I.P. Corinne Day. Yup, this is hardcore: hot teenage bodies getting wasted in rooms trashed by a stoned poltergeist; Gucci swag but with cum on it. The same spooky candour swirls around Rappeneau's painting of the wraith girl cooking up heroin in a lonely park. Trees, gloom, empty swings— a pretty tragic place to get high. But time and space are getting fucked up, too: that huge wicked bubbling cauldron of a spoon floats in the sky; that pubic undergrowth mixed with dry grass below, and the rhinestone Dolce & Gabbana belt unbuckled for some woozy teenage tryst. Before the nod hits, she zones out with memories of this environment, which means goosebumps, all kinds of high (chronically spangled, opiated, spiky), innocence lost. I don't think it's weird to relate this cultic fascination with youth near death but still radiating sexiness, anthropologically, to the early demise of Christ. 'They hung him on the cross for me', as Kurt Cobain once yowled. But what's stranger and more ravishing about Rappeneau's paintings is how they arrive at a moment when their feelings of confusion, loss and longing ache with a new kind of weirdness or sensitivity. I wish you could be with me now; I wish I could hold you tight. – Charlie Fox, 2020David Rappeneau (b. France) lives and works in France. Rappeneau has presented solo exhibitons at Queer Thoughts, New York and Crèvecœur, Paris. Select group exhibitions include Gladstone, New York; Peres Projects, Berlin; Centre d'Art Contemporain La Synagogue de Delme, FR; Balice Hertling, Paris; Bortolami, New York; Misako & Rosen; Tokyo; Foxy Production, New York and Arcadia Missa, London.

In a double rainbow, a second arc is seen outside the primary arc, and has the order of its colours reversed, with red on the inner side of the arc. This is caused by the light being reflected twice on the inside of the droplet before leaving it.* It started with the sunrises I found myself with - While finishing this show I noticed that the pictures amongst other things had two clear arcs- one through the pictures of Lara - Winter, July, Garden, Autumn, a thread of 2020 … . And the other arc the movement and colors of nature- birth, destruction,renewal.. the unstoppable nature of life..magic and grief … Where I thought some pictures of trees and sunrises would appear instead the colors and nature of nature were becoming the strokes of cheeks ,the strength of bone, (Frederick Douglass, 1850) ocean reflection becoming a transparent openness where everything is related to everything.. (E (Sky Self Portrait) (Reflection, E.P.) no edges.. Lara, July 2020, about her mother who named her after Lara in Doctor Zhivago.. about the interconnectedness of things.. the plant and the seed- my mother and me (Elizabeth Ann (Mom) (Lara, Garden, Autumn)… One morning I looked at Felix (my dog) and there was a rainbow arching behind his head- (Felix Starlight) -Elizabeth Peyton, January 2021 *(Wikipedia contributors, "Rainbow," Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia, (accessed January 28, 2021)

There's nothing as extraordinary as when you really look at things. When you look not at what you think they are or what they mean, just what they appear. I don't think I see things all the time, or I just see things in blinks and flashes. There's a confrontation and you really start to look, trying to see something. It's best to get everything else out of the way. The Winter light in New York is unmistakable, especially to anyone who has looked at it and through it. Crisp, silvery and clear, the thin blue of the afternoon sky has a clarity that feels as cold as it appears. The citizens of the city do still inhabit the streets, but mostly to go from one interior to another - from one contained protective warmth to another. Outside, the city's trees are always there, only now in naked silhouette. These three paintings of trees by Alex Katz are monumental pictures. Elegiac portraits of unique individuals who stand with a remoteness at the edges of our time. Not truly withdrawn, but abiding apart from the churn that surrounds them, these sentinels embody an elegance and brutal lucidity. The hallucinatory cropping of each work suggests a screen through which we encounter our reflected selves in infinite space. Katz arrests our gaze with the stark beauty of that New York light and the rendering of a talisman so ubiquitous it is invisible. Walking from one warm human zone to another, Katz apprehends in the instant and, retaining that sensation, then paints on the outer edge of the moment, conveying the impermanence of the light and the present. We cannot kick our yearning for transcendent absolutes, but these trees do not exist outside of the cold fact of that light that surrounds, embraces and defines them. Katz confronts our eye with an imagery that is nothing but itself. He paints cold and impersonal - absent of any feeling for the inner lives of his subjects. He renders with the pragmatism of an urgent muralist with time breathing down his neck. Humanism is absent, sentiment is stripped away, as bare as the winter trees themselves.

We are pleased to present an exhibition by Carroll Dunham, featuring new paintings from his ongoing wrestler series. Dunham's newest groups of wrestling matches are set amidst barren landscapes, deserted for all but one single tree, wherein the aggressive men are locked into differing moments of struggle. Employing formal techniques developed throughout his career, the works exemplify Dunham's unique ability to continually recontextualize his distinct visual language through new and recurring modes of artmaking. The exhibition's first group of paintings, the series Winners and Losers, is organized around an internally referential system, in which a definitive set of formal parameters informs how the figures move and interact with one another. Capturing the conclusion of their fights, these scenes depict the winners, mounted atop the losers, in varying emotional states – some are triumphant, some anguished, others more subdued. The intensity of their prior confrontations is emphasized by the overlapping layers of paint and pencil applied across the surfaces of their bodies. The artist's brilliant pencilwork is particularly highlighted in a work such as Winners and Losers (4/8), wherein a secondary, apparitional outline of the winner shadows the finished figure. Taken in as a whole, this series both balances and juxtaposes the straightforward logic of a system of formal variables against the physical and psychological mayhem of the scenes depicted. Other groups of interconnected paintings – Big Men and Big Men Up Close – document the dramatic actions of Dunham's protagonists mid-fight. In the large-scale Big Men works, Dunham portrays the distress and helplessness of one man at the hands of a stronger opponent. These struggles are memorialized through the impactful scale, as well as the confident, bold outlining of the figures. The acrobatic maneuvers that force their bodies to contort within the boundaries of the picture plane further intensify the dynamism of these complex confrontations. This vitality carries into the series Big Men Up Close, where Dunham tightly crops these fights into smaller, square-format vignettes, reminiscent of earlier bodies of work, such as Edge of His World (2002- 03) and Dead Space (2005). Pushing the figures to the forefront, these works offer a more intimate view of the protagonists, and Dunham renders the stoicism and turmoil of their expressions and choreographies with tremendous detail and emotion. Throughout the works for this exhibition, Dunham demonstrates his fascination and uncanny ability to play with scale, orientation, and composition in order to create vivid, psychologically challenging works that encapsulate the complexity of his subjects' worlds. Carroll Dunham was born in 1949 and lives and works in New York and Connecticut. Most recently, Dunham was the subject of a major two-person exhibition at Kunsthalle Düsseldorf, "Carroll Dunham / Albert Oehlen Bäume / Trees," which recently traveled to the Sprengel Museum, Hannover, Germany. His work has been the subject of numerous solo exhibitions at international institutions including Museum Ludwig, Cologne; Millesgården, Stockholm; Drammens Museum, Drammen, Norway; a mid-career retrospective was held at the New Museum of Contemporary Art, New York. Dunham has also been included in notable group exhibitions including multiple Whitney Biennials and SITE Santa Fe; and at institutions including Musée d'art moderne et contemporain, Geneva; the Museum of Modern Art, New York; Museu Picasso, Barcelona; and The Institute of Contemporary Art, Boston.

We are pleased to present Decline & Glory, an exhibition of new paintings by Jill Mulleady, the artist's first with the gallery. Activating the gallery's existing architecture, a Neoclassical-inspired late nineteenth-century Maison Bruxelloise, Mulleady stages a sequence of paintings en enfilade, with implied narratives threading between the works and the rooms of the installation. In one work, Gardens of the Blind, a chiaroscuro figure appears amidst the turbulent forces of a whirlwind and a burning landscape. The same figure is seen again in the yellow interior of 18 Rue Souveraine 1050, where she seems to have aged and is now illuminated by another fire – a psychic recurrence, or unextinguished memory. Still lifes of flowers mark the inexorable passage of time, with the same bouquet observed in different moments of decay (A Thought that Never Changes Remains a Stupid Lie). Here, a traditional motif allegorizes the seductive means by which power infiltrates our lives. Meanwhile, the Marquis de Sade sits in the solitary confinement of his prison cell, as if suspended in time between one sentence and another. Putting art historical influences in communication with fiction, Mulleady's paintings invite the viewer to wander between shifting temporalities and the rooms and floors of the house where they are installed. Painting on the surface of an antique mirror rescued from a nearby house just before it was demolished, Mulleady projects a phantasmatic scene upon the material fact of a found object. Responding to the existing neoclassical elements of Gladstone Gallery, the artist has updated the high ceiling on the ground level with a motif of rotting fruits. Decline & Glory haunts the gallery's bourgeois maison, interweaving traces of historical time and expressions of psychic life, site-specific interventions and imagined realities, to stage a dynamic encounter between painterly vision and the context of its display. Another still life depicts an octopus tangled within the complexity of its own form – an image of a changeling intelligence, momentarily adapting itself to any space whatever. A turbulent seascape, shows a massive wave gathering force beneath a bloody sky. Like de Sade in his prison cell, the wave is suspended in time, pictured just before the breaking point: a painted surface is the outer face of a chaos without limits, change beyond measure, cresting to meet the eyes. Jill Mulleady was born in Montevideo, Uruguay in 1980, and currently lives and works in Los Angeles. She has been the subject of solo exhibitions at institutions such as the Swiss Institute, New York (2019); Kunsthalle Bern (2017); and Museo Archeologico Nazionale, Napoli (2015). Recent group exhibitions include international exhibitions such as "May You Live in Interesting Times," La Biennale di Venezia, Venice (2019); and "Emissaries for Things Abandoned by Gods," Casa Luis Barragan, Mexico (2019). Her work is included in prominent institutions around the world, including the Hirshhorn Museum, Washington, DC and the Hammer Museum, Los Angeles. In March 2020, Mulleady debuted a new public artwork, "We Wither Time into a Coil of Fright," on the façade of 95 Horatio Street in New York, presented by the Whitney Museum of American Art and High Line Art. Later this year, Mulleady will present a new series of paintings at the Hammer Museum and The Huntington in "Made in L.A. 2020: a version." In May 2021, Mulleady will be included in L'Almanach 20 at Le Consortium, Dijon, France. Mulleady will soon release two new books, "Angst for Angst," published by Kunsthalle Bern, and "Fight or Flight," published by Swiss Institute.

We are pleased to present an exhibition of new paintings and drawings by Amy Sillman at the Gallery's 24th Street location in Chelsea. The exhibition will also be available online for those who are unable to see the show in person. Dear Reader, The time we're living in is crazy, horrible, almost medieval with disease, increasing police brutality and militarization, diminishment of democratic rights, and the upcoming ledge of a terrifying election. I was supposed to have a show of drawings and paintings last May at Gladstone and titled it "Twice Removed": "twice" to propose the idea of a multiplied subjectivity, being of two minds, forked paths, and having allegiances to both subject and object, thinking and feeling, abstraction and figuration, form and content, dialectics and contradictions; "removed" because my paintings are built through negation, a kind of violent erasure, scraping down, undoing, getting rid of. But twice removed was also a pun on the family relation, being adjacent to something older. I'm a knight's move away from the old tradition of gestural painting, but I'm really not trying to kill the father: I love gestural painting like it was my grandma, even though I'm skeptical, pessimistic, and sometimes critical of what she stands for. (My mom always said I was too negative.) So I was also thinking about painting as an unrolling of time—both my own genealogy and the way I wanted to unfurl paintings and drawings in long horizontal sequences around the room. I wanted the work to be like scraps and fragments, a bunch of spare parts, puzzling things dug up archeologically, arranged around the rooms of the gallery in a frieze of tangled patches. I was already thinking bleak thoughts about America, and the work looked like it: melancholy, mostly only black and white, ambiguous, often either too raw or over-cooked, ambiguous. I was trying to make a new language out of a bunch of spare parts. That show was postponed due to Covid19 and will now open in late September. But the new show is an even more shaggy, complicated affair, containing all of the above plus all the new work from this agonizing spring and summer shuffled in. For much of this time I didn't have a painting studio, so I just drew flowers, the opulent irises, day lilies, and sunflowers that were springing up around me from bushes and trees and from the earth. As Lorraine Hansberry asked (in her 1962 play), "what use are flowers?" I was obsessed with their colors and shapes, the simple joy of observing them, and how they exude libido, healing, and rebirth, even though while I was drawing them I was wondering if we might all die. Were they funerary or optimistic? During this spring, painting itself was overshadowed by the question of whether painting-life could continue to exist at all. But after months of the flowers, they started to morph into abstractions. The flower stems looked like the legs of figures stalking around, their heads bent over in a kind of looped narrative with no particular story except growth and then withering. The world's ground was shifting, so I started concentrating on the fields behind the figures— patterns, plaids, and confusing figure-to-grounds, a purposefully destabilized signal-to-noise ratio. And eventually it was the process of improvisation itself that seemed the most timely and urgent. I was thinking about a quote by Fred Moten, "improvisation is making nothing out of something." In this sense "nothing" is a good thing, it means you're in a hole, on the brink of change, and you have to listen, to pay attention. Improvising is a process that comes from within and that proposes a without, a nowhere that is everywhere. The hard questions continue (how to keep making paintings at all, if the world can possibly be rebuilt, and how) but I hope there's an alchemy in there, a use, in keeping on working with the motion between the known and an abstract (but felt) unknown.Love,Amy Amy Sillman was born in 1955 in Detroit, Michigan, and currently lives and works in New York. Sillman's work has been the subject of numerous solo exhibitions at institutions including: Arts Club of Chicago, Illinois; Camden Arts Centre, London; Albright Knox Art Gallery, Buffalo, New York; Drawing Center, New York; Portikus, Frankfurt am Main, Germany; Kunsthaus Bregenz, Austria; and the Hirshhorn Museum and Sculpture Garden, Washington, D.C. Beginning at the Institute of Contemporary Art, Boston in 2014, Sillman's solo exhibition, "one lump or two," traveled to the Aspen Art Museum in Colorado and the Center for Curatorial Studies at Bard College, New York. Her works are held in the public collections of prominent institutions such as the Art Institute of Chicago; Brooklyn Museum, New York; Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York; Museum of Modern Art, New York; National Gallery of Art, Washington D.C.; and the Whitney Museum of American Art, New York. For the Museum of Modern Art's reopening in fall 2019, Sillman curated the exhibition, "Artist's Choice: Amy Sillman—The Shape of Shape," on view through October 4, 2020. Sillman's newest book, "Amy Sillman: Faux Pas," was released in Paris this summer and will be released in the United States by DAP, available on their website as well as through Gladstone's publications page. Published by After 8 Books and edited by Charlotte Houette, François Lancien-Guilberteau, and Benjamin Thorel, with a foreword by Lynne Tillman.

We are pleased to present Drawing 2020, an exhibition of drawings made in the present moment. Twenty years ago, in the summer of 2000, Barbara Gladstone Gallery organized an exhibition entitled 00, a survey of drawings at the turn of the millennium. On the 20th anniversary of this expansive presentation, Drawing 2020 revisits this idea of drawing—how it remains vital, how it constantly mounts a quiet revolution, and how it transforms in the care of different artists—as a lens into how artists live and make work at this important moment in history.Over the last two decades and throughout the last few months, drawing as an artistic practice has developed and evolved in response to physical, political, and technological elements that impact everyday life, namely the expanding purchase of the digital in our daily lives and the rise of social media. More recently, quarantine in the face of a global pandemic and a widespread reckoning on race have changed many perspectives: these multifaceted concepts have irreparably transformed how we see the world, look at ourselves and each other, and view art. Yet, the act of drawing—the haptic connection of an artist's vision and the visualization of the world—has continued to surge forward, remaining just as important and fecund as it has for decades. Employing both traditional and unconventional materials and methods, the works in this exhibition present the inherent complexities and intrinsic qualities of what constitutes a drawing in the expanded field.The artists participating in this exhibition include: Tomma AbtsDerrick AdamsEtel AdnanRicci AlbendaCandida AlvarezTauba AuerbachMatthew BarneyAlvaro BarringtonGeorg BaselitzEllen BerkenblitHuma BhabhaDike BlairNayland BlakeMel BochnerAndrea BowersDaniel BoydJoe BradleyKerstin BrätschBrianna Rose BrooksCecily BrownBrian CalvinRoger Danilo CarmonaGillian CarnegiePaul ChanIan ChengXinyi ChengKye Christensen-KnowlesLeidy ChurchmanClaudia ComteGeorge CondoMatt ConnorsEnrico DavidThea DjordjadzeCarroll DunhamLukas DuwenhöggerTorkwase DysonThomas EggererNicole EisenmanHadi FallahpishehChristina ForrerLouis FratinoCharles GainesMaureen GallaceEllen GallagherMark Thomas GibsonLiam GillickRobert GoberWade GuytonHao LiangRachel HarrisonHugh HaydenThomas HirschhornJonathan HorowitzJacqueline HumphriesPatricia Iglesias PecoCameron JamieCheyenne JulienJane KaplowitzAlex KatzKaren KilimnikJosh KlineMichael KrebberElla KruglyanskayaLiz LarnerEllen LesperanceAndrew LordVictor ManMark MandersHelen MartenNick MaussSam McKinnissBjarne MelgaardDawn MellorStuart MiddletonJill MulleadyWangechi MutuGladys NilssonAlbert OehlenKen OkiishiDamián OrtegaPhilippe ParrenoAdam PendletonRaymond PettibonElizabeth PeytonTobias PilsPope.LWalter PriceRichard PrinceAdam PutnamChristina QuarlesR. H. QuaytmanDavid RappeneauLucy RavenDeborah RobertsUgo RondinoneEd RuschaAnri SalaDavid SallePeter SaulThomas SchütteJoel ShapiroSteven ShearerPaul SietsemaAmy SillmanBilly SullivanChristine Sun KimEmily SundbladCheyney ThompsonRirkrit TiravanijaJason TommeRosemarie TrockelPaloma Varga WeiszBanks VioletteLawrence WeinerCathy WilkesMichael WilliamsTerry WintersIssy WoodJonas WoodLisa Yuskavage*Updated as of September 17, 2020 This exhibition is accompanied by a catalogue with an essay by Molly Nesbit, which will be available digitally and soon in print through Walther König. Publications

We are pleased to present "Four," an exhibition of new and recent work by interdisciplinary Belgian artist Kasper Bosmans. Continuing his longstanding use of references spanning cultures, periods, and traditions in order to speak about ongoing socio-political issues, the show specifically uses the multivalent act of collecting as a springboard into discussing topics both deeply personal and profoundly universal. The main feature of the exhibition is a multi-panel enamel mural that displays, to-scale, the eggs of all birds painted by seventeenth-century Dutch artist Melchior d'Hondecoeter. Fitting with the genre of Dutch still life, d'Hondecoeter meticulously depicted birds brought back to the Netherlands by way of the East India Trading Company's Asian routes, as well as those endemic to Europe, and in the process created a body of work that was equal parts ornithological catalogue and phenomenological Kunstkammer. Bringing this art historical reference into the twenty-first-century, Bosmans elects to only depict the eggs of d'Hondecoeter's catalogue of birds. Rife with symbolism - from renewal and fertility, to consumption and commodification - Bosmans's eggs coyly reveal the commercial impact on the West's portrayal of history, a fact underscored by the enamel medium utilized for this work, which harkens to a material closely associated with advertising. Other parts of the exhibition further this use of historical factoids in service of topical commentary. A site-specific sand installation, a bold natural-hued mural, and a number of readymades all point to the possibilities for collection as both a necessary survival tactic and an imperialist predilection. The visual language that Bosmans adopts to investigate these issues finds added exposition in the artist's 'Legend' paintings. These small-scale paint on panel works display symbols and iconography that allow the viewer to scan the pieces for discernible clues with which to "read" the forms and themes that Bosmans considers throughout the larger exhibition. Taken as a whole, "Four" presents a body of work that collectively melds Bosmans's interest in history with his deft craftsmanship, producing an immersive environment that is both politically aware and temporally detached. Kasper Bosmans was born in Lommel, Belgium, and currently works between Brussels and Amsterdam. Solo exhibitions of Bosmans's work have been mounted worldwide at institutions including: Fuerstenberg Zeitgenossich, Donaueschingen, Germany; De Hallen, Haarlem, Netherlands; S.M.A.K., Ghent, Belgium; Witte de With, Rotterdam, Netherlands; Centrale for Contemporary Art, Brussels; CIAP, Brussels; and MuHKA, Antwerp, Belgium. In the coming year, solo presentations of his work will be held at WIELS Contemporary Art Centre in Brussels and Fondazione Arnaldo Pomodoro in Milan. Additionally, a major monographic catalogue of Bosmans's work was recently published by Walther König, tracing a decade of Bosmans's practice and artistic output.

Transfigured matter The recent sculptures nuns + monks by Ugo Rondinone take their rightful place in the continuity of a narrative introduced by the artist thirty-two years ago. A narrative composed of chapters that would never cease to interact with one another throughout a trajectory made up of intertextual questions, back-and-forths, survivals, displacements and reinventions of shapes and attitudes, or of interrogations that are constantly being renegotiated. This narrative originated in 1988 with the death of Manfred Kirchner, then Ugo Rondinone's partner, from an AIDS-related illness. "In the midst of the AIDS crisis, I turned away from my grief and found a spiritual guard rail in nature, a place for comfort, regeneration and inspiration. In nature, you enter a space where the sacred and the profane, the mystical and the secular vibrate against one another". The resulting works, landscapes with Romantic overtones painted in ink on paper were first shown at the Kunstmuseum in Lucerne, then in several other exhibitions, including one at the Walcheturm gallery in Zurich, always with the same constraint: hung in confined spaces, their windows nailed shut with wooden boards, 'cut off from the world', turned inward. From that point on, the opening up onto nature specific to the landscape found itself counterbalanced by a feeling of enclosure conducive to introspection. And a spiritual turning inward that would find itself perpetuated in the artist's self- portrait (Heyday), inspired by Joris Karl Huysmans and his fictional character, the reclusive Jean des Esseintes, and shown in the framework of his exhibition Cry me a river, also in Zurich, in 1995. Returned to its initial function, the window of the Walcheturm gallery was once again visible. In front of it was now a brown-painted frame and double pane, which opened like an arched backdrop through which one could see the self-portrait of the artist, portrayed as a passive figure, from the outside. The relationship between content and container, artwork and receptacle therefore responded to an inverted antagonistic principle. But in fine a precarious, equivalent equilibrium had been achieved, from which the spirituality expressed by the artist via the different chapters of the narrative in progress would then unfold. The nuns + monks sculptures express in turn this dialectic from within and without. From opening up onto the world and from turning inward on oneself. From an introspective gaze combined with an exteriority receptive to nature's elements of which these sculptures bear the traces. The imprint. Rondinone's works have never stopped oscillating between extremes, entangling, suspending them. Aufheben .... The sculptures of nuns + monks possess a natural beauty. An "archaic" beauty that evokes other sculptural ensembles by the artist: Human Nature on Rockefeller Plaza in 2013 and Seven Magic Mountains in the Nevada desert in 2016. They manifest visibility yet at the same time seem to avoid the gaze of those to whom they are shown. Their features are indistinct. And in this era of multiple gender identities, they are divested of sexual characteristics, even though their titles allow us to differentiate them. It would certainly be extremely difficult to distinguish the nuns from the monks based on their mere appearance. Wrapped and protected in their cloaks, they seem, like his 1995 self-portrait and the ensuing clowns and nudes, absorbed, in the same way that Diderot characterized the figures depicted in certain paintings by Chardin. Absorbed in what? In whom? In the spectators wandering around them? In the architectural space that serves as the backdrop for their paradoxically motionless choreography? Unless, as is extremely likely, the space in question is mental. Meditative. Transcending the matter that still seems to determine their heft. Or, more than transcended, one could say the matter in nuns + monks is transfigured, revealing a radiance reinforced by the chromatic contrasts, the harmony generated by the juxtaposition of different body parts—the head and the cloak—and by the sculptures, perfectly integrated from one to the next, the above mentioned radiance evoking medieval statuary serving the same religious and spiritual purpose to which the artist is deeply committed. It should be explained that the creation of these works was nourished by Rondinone's assiduous frequentation of the medieval sculpture department at the Metropolitan Museum in New York, and in addition by a powerful confrontation with Giacomo Manzù's Cardinals, whose own particular modernity, permeated by a classicism that defies time and categorization, inevitably corresponded to his interest. Between matter and its negation, these sculptures invest a polarized field. Amphibological. Made in bronze, they were conceived from limestone models, scans of which were "three-dimensionalized" with digital tools. In response to the friable limestone, the solidity of the bronze. In response to the stone's natural, ancient origins, the here and now contemporaneity of the polychrome castings. Of course, we must, as is often the case in Rondinone's work, seek the response, ineluctably unstable, inherent in his propositions in the interpenetration of the extremes and intervals they bring about. In a game of equivalences. Opening up onto the world, to nature, and turning inward on oneself. In matter that is as embodied as it is disembodied. And given its elevated spiritual coefficient, so remarkable these days and, in a manner of speaking, absent from contemporary art, in an anagogical principle that re-transcribes and accompanies the process of transfiguration underlying this group of sculptures. Erik Verhagen Translated from French by Laurie Hurwitz

We are pleased to announce an exhibition by Richard Aldrich. The artist, known for his elusive, expansive, and multidisciplinary practice, shows a series of paintings and sculptures. For this presentation, Aldrich includes a grouping of new and older works alongside one another, a common practice for the artist, to provide important conceptual counterpoints to the collected artworks on view. This holistic and non-linear assemblage of objects charts Aldrich's artistic progression over time, and demonstrates his inventive approach to the mediums he employs as well as the careful attention he pays to each installation of his work. Using images, symbols, language, painting, and music to evoke a variety of reference points and experiences, Aldrich proposes a series of complex and intertwined relationships through the ineffable visual language he has developed over the last two decades.Primarily working between the mediums of painting, sculpture, installation, and drawing, Aldrich's practice defies categorization by a particular method of execution. The seemingly impulsive, abstracted forms that appear throughout his works often contradict the complexity of their origins, and reference motifs from his own practice in both direct and indirect ways. His installations of new and existing works transform disparate elements from separate units of matter into a single, larger entity that constitutes an investigation into the objecthood of the materials he selects. Often referencing a myriad of concepts and visual language from art history and popular culture, Aldrich's inventive paintings, drawings, and sculptures are tied together by his incisive approach to visualizing immaterial concepts such as time and memory. Teetering between abstract and representational, conceptual and material, and macro and micro, Aldrich presents an interconnected network of systems with each exhibition, and the works in this presentation continue this tradition while inviting new techniques, subjects, and scales to permeate his practice.Richard Aldrich was born in 1975 in Hampton, VA, and currently lives and works in New York. Solo exhibitions of Aldrich's work have taken place at such institutions as Museum Dhont-Dhaenens, Deurle, Belgium (2017); the San Francisco Museum of Modern Art, San Francisco, USA (2011); and the Contemporary Art Museum, St. Louis, USA (2011). His work has been included in group exhibitions at museums including The Museum of Modern Art, New York; Centro Galego de Arte Contemporánea, Santiago de Compostela, Spain; and the Whitney Museum of American Art, New York. His work is in the collections of the Museum of Modern Art; the Whitney Museum; the San Francisco Museum of Modern Art; The Whitworth Art Gallery, University of Manchester; The National Museum of Art, Osaka, Japan; The Dallas Museum of Art; and the Smithsonian.

We are pleased to present an exhibition of historic works by Guo Fengyi, the artist's first exhibition with the gallery in New York. The show focuses on a selection of Guo's hyperdetailed and conceptually complex scrolls that range in scale from 12 feet to nearly 30 feet in height. Created by employing a meditation system associated with tai chi, these works present an in-depth survey of the artist's practice which began during the latter portion of her life. In addition to the drawings, the gallery will exhibit one of Guo's notebooks documenting her qigong regimen, allowing viewers a unique look at the process that afforded the artist's unique and therapeutic approach to artmaking. Concurrent to this exhibition, The Drawing Center is hosting "Guo Fengyi: To See from a Distance," the artist's first solo institutional exhibition in New York. Born in 1942 in Xi'an, China, Guo began her artistic practice later in life, and this exhibition demonstrates a series of significant and radical bodies of work that she developed throughout her career. Guo worked at a rubber factory until the age of 39, when a severe arthritis diagnosis forced her into early retirement. In order to alleviate the pain from this ailment and hoping to continue working with her hands, Guo started to study qigong, a Chinese system of physical exercise and breath control related to tai chi. While engaging in qigong, Guo would enter a state of trance that prompted transcendent visualizations that she would then transfer onto scrolls in vibrant color and ornate detail. Similar to the Surrealist implementation of automatic drawing, Guo's mode of artmaking deeply connects with early modernist tactics of allowing the subconscious to inform the act of creation, and the works included in this exhibition demonstrate her formal and conceptual rigor. Guo's methodical approach to figure drawing, activated by her traditional meditative practices, imaginatively visualizes unseen objects and concepts of interest to the artist, such as human organs, the underworld, and energy channels. Early in her career, Guo worked with readymade Chinese scrolls and used primarily black and white materials as she began to formalize a signature stylistic approach to drawing. By employing these scrolls in untraditional ways, Guo chose to render her fantastical subjects as she saw them, rather than adhering to any of the conventional methods prescribed for traditional artistic mediums. Guo's last and most prolific series of works were created on rice paper and concentrated on different figures representative of specific locations and powerful energies. This area of focus led to the creation of lively and deeply personal portraits of close companions and anonymous characters alike, such as dragons, mythological entities, and elaborately dressed personages that embodied both humanoid and otherworldly qualities. Guo's whimsical subjects also connected to her research of I Ching (Book of Changes in English), an ancient divination text and the oldest of the Chinese classics. This text informed Guo's contemplation of and depiction of traditional Chinese systems of thought, namely cosmology, divination, acupuncture energy maps, sage kings, geomancy and dynastic grave sites, all of which have become dispensable in a modernizing China. Guo's work reasserts the power of these systems, preserving cultural thought and embracing Chinese folk knowledge as both a way of living and a stimulus for creativity. Guo Fengyi was born in 1942 and passed away in 2010 in Xi'an, central China. During her lifetime, Guo was represented in major institutional exhibitions and projects at institutions such as the Gwangju Biennial (2010); The Museum of Everything, London (2009), Mori Art Museum, Japan (2009); Kunsthaus Graz, Austria (2007); Shenzhen Biennial (2006); Taipei Biennale (2005); Yokohama Triennial, Japan (2005); Prague International Biennale of Contemporary Art (2005); and the Museum of Contemporary Art, Lyon, France (2004). In 2002, Guo worked with Judy Chicago on a multi-venue event for Long March Project After her death in 2010, the Contemporary Art Gallery in Vancouver, Canada organized the first North American survey of Guo's work that opened in 2012. Other group exhibition venue highlights after her passing include The Museum of Old and New Art, Tasmania, Australia (2017); Kunsthal Rotterdam (2016); Carnegie International, Carnegie Museum of Art (2013); Hayward Gallery, London (2013); The 55th Venice Biennale (2013); and the Asian Art Museum, San Francisco (2012). Video Guo Fengyi at Gladstone Gallery, 21st Street ● ● ●

We are pleased to present an exhibition of new works by Carroll Dunham. This show focuses on the artist's monotypes, a core component of his multidisciplinary approach to artmaking. Using the themes and visual language prominent throughout his most recent series of male wrestlers, the works on view demonstrate Dunham's interest in experimentation and his seamless ability to depict forms in space with the visual language he has mastered throughout his decades-long career. Dunham's newest wrestlers, all made in 2019 and 2020, are shown engaging in a variety of intense actions situated in vibrant and isolated landscapes. The environments where these men fight are almost completely barren with only a few decipherable trees and horizon lines depicted in the distance. Rendered with saturated purple, blue, green, red, and yellow watercolors, the nude men attack, scratch, choke, and grab at each other in an effort to exert dominance over one another. The men are shown either writhing in pain, as shown by wide opened mouths of men seeming to scream, or are rendered completely stoic with inanimate facial expressions. Pink, brown, and blue scratches, finger smudges, and the artist's handprints made with water-soluble materials, such as watercolors, pencil, and airbrush, adorn the white bodies, suggesting the blood, dirt, and bruises that accompany these intense flights. Dunham's intentional inclusion of his hand in this tangible way reiterates his interest in the malleability of the monotype-making process, and suggests an interest in pushing the possibilities of both new and recurring materials he uses in his work. Similar to Dunham's large-scale paintings, the scenes he creates are confined by sharp black lines that contain the actions and the environments depicted. Here, however, the bodies and colors begin to break past the barriers, further drawing the viewer into these compositions and demonstrating the mutability of the monotype-making process that inspires Dunham's explorative approach to this medium. At the same time, these narratives overtly connect visually and conceptually to the female and male figures Dunham has continuously returned to through his larger body of work that draws from art history and memory to represent figures and scenes of nature. The visceral and psychological narratives that develop throughout these dramatic brawls continue Dunham's inquisitive approach to artmaking through an intentional utilization of the fluidity of making monotypes. As shown through the works in this exhibition, this process of printmaking enables Dunham to experiment with new approaches, materials, and techniques within the framework of his singular and thought-provoking practice. Carroll Dunham was born in 1949 and lives and works in New York and Connecticut. He is currently the subject of a major two-person exhibition at Kunsthalle Düsseldorf, "Carroll Dunham / Albert Oehlen Bäume / Trees," on view through March 1. His work has been the subject of numerous solo exhibitions at international institutions including Museum Ludwig, Cologne; Millesgården, Stockholm; Drammens Museum, Drammen, Norway; a mid-career retrospective was held at the New Museum of Contemporary Art, New York. Dunham has also been included in notable group exhibitions including multiple Whitney Biennials and SITE Santa Fe; and at institutions including Musée d'art moderne et contemporain, Geneva; the Museum of Modern Art, New York; Museu Picasso, Barcelona; The Institute of Contemporary Art, Boston. Video Carroll Dunham at Gladstone Gallery, Brussels ● ● ● Carroll Dunham at Gladstone Gallery, Brussels 2020

We are pleased to present an exhibition of new soft sculptures and bronzes by Sarah Lucas from her ongoing body of Bunnies, which she began making in 1997. Expanding her unique visual language of pantyhose, stuffing, and chairs, to include concrete, bronze, and steel, that Lucas has employed since her rise to international prominence in the mid-nineties, the works in this show demonstrate the artist's powerful ability to transform utilitarian materials into conceptually complex objects that pose urgent questions about gender, sexuality, and identity. A concurrent exhibition of new works from this seminal series are on view at Sadie Coles HQ, London from March 16 through May 10, 2020. Throughout her career, Lucas's works have dealt candidly and humorously with the body while grappling with themes such as a sex, death, and the notion of Englishness, and the Bunnies masterfully capture these core elements of her practice. Comprised of stuffed pairs of tights placed ungracefully on chairs, the figures are meant to evoke splayed legs, highlighting the awkward, absurd, and vulnerable positions and situations these figures inhabit. While the Bunnies signify Lucas's earliest examples of works that use stuffed stockings to create anthropomorphic human forms, Lucas began to expand their scope by creating a body of work entitled NUDS, which consists of abstract knots or contortions out of similar materials while also introducing gold-hued bronze and concrete. The NUDS started to take the shapes of slouching humanoid forms placed atop concrete brick pedestals transforming the suggestive knots into recognizable bodies. In this installation, Lucas has merged these contortions, also adding shoes into the mix, to create plump and luscious figures both de Sadean and mod. Each lump and seated torsion of perverted fun and twisted discipline is an affective and narrative turn: these are sweetened-up honeys, haus fraus out for a thrill, hens gone mad. Sarah Lucas was born in London in 1962, and studied at the Working Men's College (1982–83), London College of Printing (1983–84), and Goldsmith's College (1984–87). She has been the subject of numerous exhibitions at some of the world's most prestigious institutions, including Red Brick Art Museum, Beijing (2019); Hammer Museum, Los Angeles (2019); New Museum, New York (2018); Fine Arts Museums of San Francisco ' Legion of Honor (2017); Whitechapel Gallery, London (2013); Henry Moore Institute, Leeds (2012); Museo Diego Rivera Anahuacalli, Mexico City (2012); Tate Liverpool (2005); Kunsthalle Zürich (2005); Tate Britain, London (2004); Tate Modern, London (2002); the Freud Museum, London (2000); Museum Boymans-van Beunigen, Rotterdam (1996); Museum of Modern Art, New York (1993). In 2015, Lucas represented Britain at the 56th Venice Biennale, with the exhibition I SCREAM DADDIO. Video Sarah Lucas: HONEY PIE at Gladstone 64 ● ● ● Clarissa Dalrymple reflects on Sarah Lucas's exhibition at Gladstone 64

We are pleased to present an exhibition of new works by Michael Williams. For this exhibition, Williams presents a series of large-scale inkjet paintings that continue his exploration of the possibilities and complications inherent to making and understanding a painting in the digital age. The works on view are composed entirely in Photoshop with the use of a digital drawing pad. By rendering these works in the format of flattened inkjet prints, Williams questions the action of painting as a physical extension of the body. Utilizing the full potential of these new processes, Williams makes paintings that can also function formally and move the conversation beyond what defines the analog versus the digital. Through a series of compositions that incorporate both familiar and new subjects, Williams demonstrates his singular approach to artmaking.Williams' work highlights both the banality and extraordinary nature of contemporary life, and the works in this presentation continue the artist's careerlong interest in visualizing these complex subjects. His multifaceted, masterfully constructed compositions collage text, symbols, animals, and figures that require a new mode of reading in order to understand the meaning behind each narrative he depicts. To divine Williams' works, the viewer visually unpacks obstructed layers and image fragments to find concrete signifiers that are actively constructing and deconstructing themselves. Though there may be hundreds of layers in one of Williams' paintings, the process of printing flattens the picture down to a single plane, removing any physical evidence of the artist's complex approach to each composition. The multilayered nature of these paintings is readily apparent in a work like "Struck Set," which depicts a disheveled dining room table with chairs out of place, broken plates, and red wine spills. In this composition, Williams also includes his own paintings from this exhibition on the walls of this imagined room, suggesting conceptual and narrative through lines between this group of paintings. In addition to demonstrating Williams' compelling ability to visualize narrative events and concepts, this exhibition also reveals the artist's dark sense of humor and continual investigation of the role of the painter in a post-internet world.Michael Williams was born in 1978 in Doylestown, Pennsylvania. He has been the subject of numerous major solo and groups exhibitions at institutions such as Le Consortium, Dijon, France; The Carnegie Museum of Art in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania; Brant Foundation, Greenwich, Connecticut; Rubell Family Collection, Miami; Musée des Beaux-Arts de Montreal, Canada; Secession, Vienna; the Museum of Modern Art, New York; Dallas Museum of Art, Dallas, Texas; Wexner Center for the Arts, Columbus, Ohio; Ballroom Marfa, Texas; and the Garage Center for Contemporary Culture, Moscow. Video Michael Williams: Opening at Gladstone Gallery, 24th Street ● ● ●

We are pleased to present an exhibition of new works by Cameron Jamie, the artist's first exhibition with the gallery in Brussels. Jamie, who works in various media, including drawing, sculpture, printmaking, film and performance, debuts a new series of ceramic masks that both foreground his intervention into the traditional practice of the medium and continue his longstanding investigation of the mask as form, including its various cultural antecedents and its performative potential in ritual. Jamie's fascination with the mask over the course of the past three decades can be discerned from his earliest works and draws from a variety of sources such as wrestling subcultures, the continually recycled pagan tropes of Halloween celebrations, and the folk rituals and traditions of various regions in Central Europe. He has continued to examining mask-making in a variety of materials, as in the large installation of eleven carved wooden masks making up Smiling Disease (2008) and a series of inverted ceramic masks, bodies of work that were both recently exhibited at the 2019 Venice Biennale.For this new body of work, Jamie has created a rogues' gallery of ceramic masks, some mounted traditionally to confront the viewer, while others are turned to the wall to reveal their undersides. Through a multistage process of repeated firing and glazing, each work is coated with an animated surface pattern of lava-like patinas with spectacular complexity and richness. Brightly colored and heavily textured with protrusions and surface markings, Jamie's masks relate abstractly to humanoid facial expressions and attributes. Often recalling tropes of mysterious folkloric figures, these works simultaneously suggest mounted hunters' trophies and the possibilities of assuming a different persona. Since 2015, Jamie has been experimenting with hanging his ceramic masks toward the wall, subverting expectations by negating a clear frontal view. While the traditional function of the mask is to disguise the identity of its wearer for the purposes of ritual, these backwards masks instead expose what is usually hidden. They allow the viewer to psychically inhabit the disguise, taking on a potentially new persona or soul for the self. Revealing the mask's interior structure not only confounds the viewers' initial expectations, but also refocuses their attention from external appearances toward a more enigmatic interiority, essentially functioning as a metonym for every individual's psychological malleability. In his prolonged exploration of the mask's form and function, Jamie elucidates how persona and performance are not only slippery constructs of social factors, but also aesthetic postures of being.Cameron Jamie was born in Los Angeles in 1969 and has lived in France since 2000. Most recently, his work has been featured in the 2019 Venice Biennale and The Sorcerer's Burden at The Contemporary Austin, where he presented his first monumental bronze sculpture in the Betty and Edward Marcus Sculpture Park at Laguna Gloria. Jamie has been the subject of museum surveys at the Kunsthalle Zurich (2013) and the Walker Art Center, Minneapolis (2006, traveling to the MIT List Visual Arts Center). Jamie has been featured in film festivals and major group exhibitions including Traces du sacré at Centre Georges Pompidou (2008), the Berlin Biennial (2010), the Whitney Biennial (2006), the Venice Biennale (2005 and 2019), the Lyon Biennale (2015), The Infinite Mix at the Hayward Gallery (2016), The Absent Museum at Wiels (2017), and NICC Brussels (2019). In 2008, Jamie was the first recipient of the Yanghyun Prize, and in 2016 he was awarded the Daniel and Florence Guerlain Art Foundation prize for drawing.

We are pleased to present Spectrum, an exhibition of new works by T. J. Wilcox. For this show, Wilcox debuts a six-part silent film based on different colors of the rainbow. In its installation, each hue blends together and elaborates a figure or event that has been seminal to the artist's experience in becoming an artist and as a gay man. The works in this show explore the artist's maturation and identity in ways that are both deeply personal and universal. Alongside the film, Wilcox presents a series of new photocollages on silk based on the video works that comprise Spectrum, adding this new material to his expanding practice. The elliptical narratives from Spectrum transform a series of visual fragments into dissected fractions of light that delve into a variety of topics significant to Wilcox's identity and research interests. Drawing from a range of cultural sources, from documentary to mythic, the single projection film investigates Wilcox's cathexis towards objects of popular fixation and their significance in the formation of the artist's queer identity. With Hyacinth and Apollo and Taglioni's Dance, Wilcox references figures engaged in the act of preservation, of cultivating their own legends. Both Apollo's invention of the hyacinth to memorialize his lover and prima ballerina La Taglioni's habitual reenactment of her starlit dance over the snow parallel Wilcox's process of reconstructing a memory through the use of emblematic imagery. In the works that derive from documentary sources, Garden in Hell, Grapefruit, and Green Carnation, Wilcox similarly manipulates significant anecdotes—gathering archival footage of Vogue editrix Diana Vreeland's red living room, meditating on green carnations as a stand-in for Oscar Wilde's flamboyant persona and as a reference to his prosecution for gross indecency, or Yoko Ono's book of life instructions—in order to deconstruct the process by which history is distilled from embodied living experiences. Often, Wilcox's evocative images hold queer double-meanings, and the same holds true in Monarch Butterfly which follows the eponymous creature, commonly associated with gay men and thought of as delicate and frivolous, as it completes one of the most complex migratory events in the natural world, traveling over 8,000 miles on its paper-thin wings. Exhibited simultaneously as looped videos that are projected onto a long, narrow screen, each film has differing durations. The resulting projection creates a seemingly never-ending viewing experience within the structurally complex exhibition space Wilcox has constructed. The narratives and colors bleed into one another, creating an optically compelling story that can be read or experienced as six different films or a single image. This complexity and careful attention to creating an immersive environment is further demonstrated through the monumental scale of the single screen and the cascading rainbow that appears beneath the projection, continuing to envelop the viewer into a space that is both vibrant and contemplative.Alongside each film, Wilcox has made a series of multi-ply silk hangings, printed with a photo-collaged images that references the source materials from each new video work. The collages borrow from documentary sources, Wilcox's own photography, illustrations, and found imagery to construct portraits of the historical subjects or natural world. Recalling both the omnipresent flag of queer liberation and the importance of the color spectrum in the optics of film and photography, Wilcox's hanging photographs explore both process and history with a subtle biographical edge. T. J. Wilcox was born in 1965 in Seattle, Washington, and lives and works in New York. His work has been the subject of solo exhibitions at institutions including the Whitney Museum of American Art, New York; Grand Rapids Art Museum, Michigan; Carthage Hall, Lismore Castle Arts, Waterford, Ireland; Stedelijk Museum, Amsterdam; and Kunstverein Munich, Munich. Wilcox has been included in group exhibitions at institutions including the Museum of Modern Art, New York; Musee d'art et d'histoire, Geneva; Centro Galego De Arte Contemporánea, Santiago de Compostela, Spain; Kunstsammlung Nordrhein-Westfalen, Düsseldorf, Germany; Museum Ludwig, Cologne, Germany. His films have been screened at the Museum of Modern Art, New York, and the Tate Modern, London, and he participated in the 2015 Biennale de Lyon and the 2004 Whitney Biennial.

We are pleased to present an exhibition of paintings by Salvo (1947 – 2015). Focusing on the artist's compositions of landscapes and cities, this show surveys more than 30 years of Salvo's artistic practice and highlights his early conceptual art and his astounding aptitude for portraying the complexities of light and the passage of time. Organized in collaboration with Archivio Salvo, the works in this show solidify Salvo's singular and ever explorative approach to artmaking and his lasting impact on Italian modernism. Salvo, whose given name was Salvatore Mangione, was born in Leonforte, Sicily, in 1947. After permanently relocating to his adoptive city of Turin in 1968, he quickly became involved in the blossoming Arte Povera movement, which was born as a response to the social and political unrest in Italy throughout the 1960s. During this period, Salvo shared a studio with Alighiero Boetti, one of the pioneers of this radical movement. Salvo and Boetti had an ongoing relationship and reciprocally collaborative influence on each other's practices; the combination of influences from Boetti and other artists of the time impacted Salvo's own artmaking and understanding of the world around him. At this early stage in his career, Salvo employed conceptual strategies to meditate on the nature of artistic practice, and the role of the artist as both a preternaturally talented individual and a conduit to the past and the history of culture. An example of works from this period include a series of "self-portraits" - altered or staged photographs that depicted him as a baker, bartender, guerilla, saint, and the painter Raphael. By 1973, Salvo pivoted away from conceptual work and began to explore the radical and complex possibilities inherent to figurative painting.The impulse Salvo felt to transform the nature of his work culminated in a powerful visual shift that preoccupied him for decades and resulted in a series of paintings with incredible depth, consistency, and nuance. Salvo's rebuttal to the monochrome aesthetic in the hyper-saturated, imagined landscapes and cityscapes he began to depict made him an artistic outlier until the international resurgence of painting in the 1980s. The works in this exhibition, painted between 1980 and 2011, harken back to avant-garde predecessors like Giorgio de Chirico and Carlo Carrà in distilling real, imagined, and remembered spaces into a profound meditation on the passage of time. The pastoral scenes and quaint villages Salvo portrays are created with a vibrant palette of oil paints and reference architectural motifs and plant species native to the cities where he lived and worked. Unlike de Chirico and Carrà's visual response to industrialization and modernism, Salvo's paintings focus more specifically on complex psychological narratives and abstract concepts like time. This ability to translate the passage of time through his incisive approach to capturing differing lighting situations is further demonstrated by the titles of Salvo's paintings; many of the works on view are named after seasons, months, or times of day. The multifaceted body of work Salvo left behind solidifies his crucial place in the history of art and lasting influence on modern and contemporary artists alike. Concurrent to the exhibition, Gladstone will reprint Salvo: Della Pittura / On Painting / Über die Malerei (Buchhandlung Walther König), the publication from the gallery's first exhibition with the artist in 1986. Salvo was born Salvatore Mangione in Leonforte, Sicily, in 1947 and lived and worked primarily in Turin until his death in 2015. Solo presentations of his work include the Museum Folkwang, Essen (1977); Mannheimer Kunstverein (1977); Kunstmuseum Lucerne (1983); Museum Boijmans van Beuningen, Rotterdam (1988); Musée d'Art Contemporain, Nîmes (1988); Villa delle Rose, Bologna (1998); Galleria d'Arte Moderna e Contemporanea, Bergamo (2002); Galleria d'Arte Moderna e Contemporanea, Turin (2007); Museo d'Arte della Svizzera Italiana, Lugano, with Alighiero Boetti (2017). He also participated in Documenta 5 (1972) and the 1976 and 1988 editions of the Venice Biennale.

We are pleased to present Ugo Rondinone's thanx 4 nothing, a mutli-channel video installation that pays tribute to the artist's late husband, John Giorno. Rondinone reconstructs the gallery into a black box theater, creating an immersive environment through the use of black-and-white film, minimalist score, and the rhythmic intonations of Giorno's own voice. This exhibition is a prismatic paean to the poet, raconteur, muse, cultural icon, and New York fixture. Curator Ralph Rugoff said of the work on the occasion of its installation at Hayward Gallery in 2016: In elegantly spectacular fashion, Ugo Rondinone's 20-screen video installation, thanx 4 nothing (2015), presents the American poet John Giorno reciting – though 'performing' might be a better word – the titular poem. Written on his seventieth birthday in 2006, and framed as an extended and wide-ranging expression of gratitude to 'everyone for everything,' Giorno's poetic monologue looks back over his life with frank insight and humour, reflecting on loves and losses, friends and enemies, sex and drugs, depression and spiritual acceptance. As presented by Rondinone, whose work inventively interlaces the rhythms of his images with those of the poet's speech, it is also a dizzying meditation on duality. Ugo Rondinone was born in 1964 in Brunnen, Switzerland and lives and works in New York. Since 2013 Rondinone has been the subject of solo exhibitions at institutions including: Kunsthalle Helsinki; Tate Liverpool; ARKEN Museum of Modern Art, Copenhagen; Bass Museum of Art, Miami; Château de Versailles; Berkeley Art Museum and Pacific Film Archive; Contemporary Arts Center, Cincinnati; Garage Museum of Contemporary Art, Moscow; Place Vendôme, Paris; MACRO and Mercati di Traiano, Rome; Carré D'Art, Nimes; Museum Boijmans van Beuningen, Rotterdam; Palais De Tokyo, Paris; Art Gallery of NSW, Sydney; Secession, Vienna; Anahuacalli Museum, Mexico City; Rockbund Art Museum, Shanghai; Museum of Cycladic Art, Athens; Kunsthistorisches Museum Wien; Museum Dhondt-Dhaenens, Deurle, Belgium; M – Museum Leuven, Belgium; Public Art Fund, Rockefeller Center; New York and Art Institute of Chicago. In 2016, Rondinone's large-scale public work "seven magic mountains" opened outside Las Vegas, co-produced by the Art Production Fund and Nevada Museum of Art. In 2017, Rondinone curated a city-wide exhibition, "Ugo Rondinone: I ♥ John Giorno," which honored the artist's life partner in thirteen non-profit art institutions throughout Manhattan.

We are pleased to present an exhibition of new work by the New York-based artist Anne Collier. Over the past two decades, Collier has developed an expansive body of work that considers the nature of photographic images, our relationship with photographs' transmission and objecthood, and the discipline of photography itself. Informed as much by technical and commercial aspects of the medium as by the work of the 'Pictures' generation artists, Collier's work explores photography's self-reflexivity and examines its fraught histories with gender. Her practice traffics in the subtle tensions between an objective, almost-forensic approach to image-making and the often highly emotive and psychologically-charged content her work depicts. For this exhibition, Collier will introduce a new series of photographic triptychs with the collective title 'Filter.' These new works expand upon her ongoing series Woman Crying (Comic) and Tear (Comic): each based on imagery sourced from American romance comic books published between the 1950s and the 1980s. Exclusively marketed to an adolescent female readership, the comic books' cliched narratives reinforced the notion of a subservient and eternally suffering female subject. Writing in 2018 about this series art historian Tom McDonough said: "Woman Crying (Comic) and Tear (Comic) consist of photographic details of their ostensible subjects drawn from romance comics of an earlier era, that of four-color process printing and Ben-Day dots. With these works we are in the realm of the extreme close-up … At this level of enlargement, we become engrossed by the details of the printing process itself, with its separation and overlay of cyan, magenta, and yellow dots, and its inky black that sits on top of these colors, defining contours and the dense thickets of eyelashes and brows. We even glimpse the grain of the cheap paper on which these panels were printed, losing ourselves between the heightened emotional state depicted, its stylized representation, and the mechanical means by which it has been reproduced." 'Filter' not only amplifies Collier's ongoing consideration of the analogue photographic process, but also heightens the viewer's disorientation within the exaggerated valences of affective resonance, aestheticized depiction, and technological reproduction that is central to Collier's project. After shooting these photographs using a large-format plate camera, Collier worked with a Kodak Color Print Viewing Filter Kit, a now largely redundant, pre-digital technical aide designed to assist with color correction when making photographic prints. Collier laid different graduated colored viewing filters onto a photographic image of a crying woman to create a series of three-part, sequential images that suggest a liminal space somewhere between photography and cinema. In these works, through her foregrounding of the photographic process and her self-conscious use of seriality, cropping, and chromatic shifts, Collier makes evident the manipulations inherent to both the semiotic and optical regimes of images and of the medium of photography. Anne Collier was born in Los Angeles in 1970 and currently lives and works in New York. Collier's work was the subject of a recent survey exhibition at the Sprengel Museum, Hanover, Germany, (2018), that traveled to Fotomuseum Winterthur, Switzerland (2019). Other recent solo museum exhibitions include: FRAC Normandie, Rouen, France (2017); and a major survey organized by the Museum of Contemporary Art, Chicago (2014), which traveled to the Hessel Museum of Art, CCS Bard College, Annandale-on-Hudson, NY (2014); the Aspen Art Museum, Aspen (2015), and the Art Gallery of Ontario, Toronto, Canada (2016). Her work is included in the permanent collections of the Museum of Modern Art, the Whitney Museum of American Art, and the Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum in New York; the Museum of Contemporary Art, Los Angeles; the Hammer Museum, Los Angeles; the Los Angeles County Museum of Art; the San Francisco Museum of Modern; the Art Institute of Chicago; the Walker Art Center, Minneapolis; the Art Gallery of Ontario, Toronto, Canada; Centre Georges Pompidou, Paris; FRAC Normandie, Rouen, France; Fotomuseum Winterthur, Switzerland; Moderna Museet, Stockholm; and Tate, London, among others.

We are pleased to present an exhibition of new work by Andro Wekua. Known for the multidisciplinary nature of his practice, Wekua has created a series of paintings and sculptures that continue his career-long exploration of the liminal space between objectivity and subjective interpretation. In works that are redolent with the artifacts of an ambiguous and undefined history, Wekua presents a series of tableaux that reveal themselves to us as emotionally familiar in spite of the artist's gestures of obfuscation and his conscious disavowal of the formal tropes of narrative. Using collage and assemblage as metaphors for the cognitive machinations that transform lived experience into reflection, the exhibition features a group of paintings that redeploy imagery recurrent throughout Wekua's oeuvre. Silkscreened onto aluminum and subsequently overpainted—often gilded with silver leaf—images of palm fronds, photographic portraits, dolphins, and sections of wrought iron fence present themselves as sites of contemplation analogous to traditional icons. The artist's continual reconfiguration of the images that define his visual lexicon indicates a compulsion to reorder the past in a search for alternative outcomes, in spite of the futility of ever finding satisfaction. Central to the exhibition are two new bronze sculptures. The body of an androgynous child peering out from behind a palm leaf and a dolphin mimics the accretion of imagery that develop Wekua's paintings and collages. However, its figurative relations do not liberate it from the realm of narrative inconclusion. Featureless and undefined, the figure instead remains a floating signifier suspended in anamnesis. A second sculpture of Eros encircled by a dolphin furthers the conceptual underpinnings of the exhibition. Though the object reiterates two themes found throughout the artist's oeuvre, it was inspired by a second century sculpture located at the Farnese Collection in Naples. While Wekua presents a near duplication of the original, he alters significant details through acts of concealment and deletion. By removing Eros's mouth and feet, Wekua directly addresses the failures inherent to the concept of the copy. Both figures' have also been fitted with highly realistic and expressive milled glass eyes, a detail that reflects the viewer's desire to fill in the information that Wekua withholds while simultaneously imbuing uncanny liveliness on an otherwise emphatically inanimate object. Andro Wekua was born in 1977 in Georgia, and studied visual arts there and in Basel, Switzerland. Recent solo museum exhibitions include Kunsthalle Zürich, Switzerland; Garage Museum of Contemporary Art, Moscow; Kölnischer Kunstverein, Germany; Kunsthalle Wien, Austria; Kunsthalle Fridericianum, Kassel, Germany; Castello di Rivoli, Turin, Italy; Wiels, Brussels; Neue Kunst Halle, St. Gallen, Switzerland; Kunstmuseum Winterthur, Switzerland; Museum Boijmans van Beuningen, Rotterdam, Netherlands; Camden Arts Center, London; the De Haalen Haarlem, Netherlands; Le Magasin, Grenoble, France; and the Benaki Museum, Athens. He has participated in various group shows including "ILLUMInations" at the 54th Venice Biennale (2011); "Contemplating the Void" at the Guggenheim Museum in New York (2010); "10,000 Lives," 8th Gwangju Biennale, South Korea (2010); "Life on Mars: 55th Carnegie International," Carnegie Museum of Art, Pittsburgh, and the 4th Berlin Biennial (2006).

We are pleased to present Embrasure, an exhibition of new drawings, etchings, and sculpture by Matthew Barney. The works in Embrasure draw from the narratives, processes, and imagery introduced in Barney's latest project Redoubt, while expanding on its allegorical and cosmological themes. Barney's 2018 film Redoubt is set on a wolf hunt in Idaho's rugged Sawtooth Mountains, continuing the artist's long-standing preoccupation with landscape as both setting and subject. Redoubt adopts the ancient myth of Diana, goddess of the hunt, and Actaeon, a hunter who trespasses on her, as its narrative framework. In Redoubt, an Engraver, played by Barney, creates a series of plein-air drawings on copper plates as he stalks Diana and her attendants. An Electroplater in a remote laboratory subjects them to a chemical process that transforms the Engraver's drawings: each plate is immersed in an electroplating solution, causing copper growths to form on the engraved lines. Her actions, undertaken with a ritualistic focus, transform the engravings into talismanic objects, connecting them to Barney's work in drawing, sculpting, and performance. The drawings in Embrasure, made with graphite and charcoal in the artist's richly colored plastic frames, take the characters, sites, and iconography of Redoubt as points of departure into a world more ominous and strange. In these intricate drawings, Diana is rendered as a fierce deity, replete with tactical gear; Actaeon, whose mythical death is only a subtext in Redoubt, is here fully transformed and impaled on a burnt tree. Ornate fortresses of war allude to the military architecture that inspired this new project and its title; elevation maps are abstracted into feverish patterns. Barney's fascination with the topography of Idaho is equaled here by a fixation on the celestial landscape, as the Lupus constellation – the wolf – appears in several drawings. In Embrasure, Barney also debuts a series of etchings that combine traditional printmaking processes with the electroplating technique developed in Redoubt. In this case, a network of copper is propagated through minute pores in the paper etchings, creating nodules that partially obscure the engraved lines. In addition to the works on paper, Barney presents a new sculpture, which he made with a tree harvested from a forest fire area in the Sawtooth Mountains. The work was made by pouring molten brass and copper into a hollowed-out recess in the tree, creating a unique cast that layers the two metals in an unrepeatable organic form. Concurrent to the exhibition at Gladstone, New York's Film Forum will host the theatrical release of Redoubt, which will play from October 30 through November 12, 2019. In early 2020, Landmark's Nuart Theatre will host the Los Angeles premiere of the film, followed by additional screenings around the country to be announced soon. Matthew Barney was born in San Francisco in 1967 and lives and works in New York. Barney's most recent project, Redoubt, premiered at the Yale University Art Gallery on March 1, 2019, and is currently on view at the UCCA Center for Contemporary Art, Beijing, China through January 12, 2020. Additional one-person exhibitions include: THE CREMASTER CYCLE, organized by the Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, New York and traveled to Museum Ludwig, Cologne and Musée d'Art Moderne de la Ville de Paris; DRAWING RESTRAINT, organized by the 21st Century Museum for Contemporary Art, Kanazawa, Japan and traveled to Leeum Samsung Museum of Art, Seoul; San Francisco Museum of Modern Art; Serpentine Gallery, London; and Kunsthalle Vienna; and RIVER OF FUNDAMENT, organized by Haus der Kunst, Munich and traveled to The Museum of Old and New Art, Tasmania, and the Museum of Contemporary Art, Los Angeles. Barney has received numerous awards including the Aperto prize at the 1993 Venice Biennale; the Hugo Boss Award in 1996; the 2007 Kaiser Ring Award in Goslar, Germany and the San Francisco International Film Festival's Persistence of Vision Award in 2011.

We are pleased to present an exhibition of recent work by artist Maureen Gallace. This exhibition will be the first devoted solely to her work on paper in which she uses both drawing and painting to evoke the vernacular milieu of the New England coast. Known for landscape and still life paintings, her meditative compositions belie a sophisticated rethinking of realism. With gestures equally immediate and thoughtful, Gallace reawakens the potential in the modernist idea of significant form which, as Clive Bell formulated, is a mode of simplified abstract representation where "we catch a sense of ultimate reality." In her renderings of saltbox houses, beaches, and everyday flora, Gallace expands on this art historical premise to imbue her significant forms with personal significance—a recognizable sense of place shadowed with fugitive memory and the atmosphere of lived experience. For this exhibition, Gallace presents almost 70 works on paper that capture similar subjects of her well-known paintings, though with a more intimate and gestural edge. In documenting these moments, she creates a quiet stillness, for instance in evocative contours that seemingly halt a wave just as it crashes. Still displaying the same precision and disarming complexity of composition, her drawings have an anatomical relationship to the paintings, delineating the shapes that comprise her signature idiom: shells, flowers, beaches, and impassive buildings that dot the coast. Critic Bruce Hainley draws connection between Gallace's work and the intellectual traditions of New England, recognizing in her work "philosophical and literary precursors in the private, thorny independents of the American Renaissance: Henry David Thoreau and Emily Dickinson. These genius home-dwellers didn't need to leave the backyard or bedroom to travel vast distances; their quiet yet fierce art entailed a scientific observation of the natural world around them: the psyche's meteorology as part of the weather." It is in the making of interiority's atmosphere palpable through the metonym of everyday exterior views, creating a tension between the subjective and the objective, that endows Gallace's realism with its affecting resonance. Maureen Gallace has been the subject of major solo exhibitions, including a 20-year survey show, "Clear Day," at MoMA PS1, New York, in 2017. Other exhibitions include: La Conservera, Murcia, Spain, 2011; The Art Institute of Chicago, 2006; Douglas Hyde Gallery, Dublin, 2004; Dallas Museum of Art, 2003; and the 2010 Whitney Biennial.

We are pleased to present an exhibition of new and recent paintings by Belgian artist Walter Swennen, his third show with the gallery in New York. In this presentation, the artist continues his career-long exploration of language, culture, and memory through his incisively layered paintings, displaying the profound impact that psychology, mass media, and his own life experiences have had on his practice. Known for his playful, vibrant, and contemplative paintings that defy one signature style, Swennen employs his background as a philosopher and poet to create works that are defined by the absence of a single aesthetic perspective or theoretical framework. Steeped in the work of Sigmund Freud, Søren Kierkegaard, and Jacques Lacan, among many others, the artist begins his painting process using a psychoanalytical approach. Sourcing imagery from his own personal history and remembered visual culture, Swennen creates works whose abstract and figurative elements oscillate between the subjects depicted and the gestures and techniques used in their representation. Color also plays a pivotal role in the artist's paintings: Swennen's intuitive, complex juxtapositions of hues belie the apparent simplicity of the mundane artifacts he depicts. These images are constantly circling, offering glimpses of half-forgotten childhood cartoons, spatial jokes, and appropriated symbols in ways that ambiguate his painterly expressions of fantasy, reality, and psychoanalytical elements. Another significant component of Swennen's artmaking practice is his critical engagement with language. Early in the artist's life, his family abruptly switched from speaking his native tongue, Flemish, to speaking French at home. After some years, he was unable to speak or understand Flemish, a profound experience of language's abstraction, its instability, and its susceptibility to the free play of meaninglessness. Letters and fragmented sentences in English, Flemish, French and other languages appear in many of his canvases, alternately providing, removing, and complicating the meaning of painting. Blurring the lines between clarity and illegibility, seriousness and humor, and fact and fiction, Swennen's paintings demonstrate his constant experimentation and continual interest in combining materials, colors, and techniques in new, unconventional and inventive ways. Walter Swennen was born in 1946 in Brussels, where he presently lives and works. His work has been the subject of numerous solo exhibitions at international institutions including La Triennale di Milano, Milan (2018); Kunstverein für die Rheinlande und Westfalen, Düsseldorf (2015); WIELS Contemporary Art Center, Brussels (2013); Culturgest Lisbon (2013); Kunstverein Freiburg (2012); MuKHA Antwerp, Belgium (1994); and Kunsthal Rotterdam (1994). Swennen has also been included in notable group exhibitions including: "Atopolis, Manège de Sury," Mons (2015); "The Importance of Being...," Museo Nacional de Bellas Artes, Havana (2015); "Idiolect," Arentshuis, Bruges (2009); "La Belgique Visionnaire/Visionair België," curated by Harald Szeemann, Palais des Beaux-Arts/Paleis voor Schone Kunsten, Brussels (2005); "Voir en Peinture," FRAC Ile de France/Le Plateau, Paris (2003); "La Consolation," Centre d'Art National Contemporain, Le Magasin, Grenoble (1999); and "Trouble Spot. Painting," MuKHA Antwerp (1999).

We are pleased to announce Cadastre, an exhibition of new works by Allora & Calzadilla and the duo's third exhibition with the Gallery. The exhibition revisits the Surrealist encounter with the anti-colonial movement in the Caribbean to consider present forms of coloniality and its relation to climate justice. The artists have taken inspiration from the radical and transformative collection of poems by Martinican poet and politician Aimé Césaire under the same name. The term "cadastre" refers to the means by which the territorial limits of private property are publicly registered. Taking cue from the powerful mechanics of Césaire's writing, Allora & Calzadilla's exhibition Cadastre brings together three works all informed by a poetics of mark making, traces, and survival. In April 1941, the anti-colonial Martinican poets and theoreticians Susanne and Aimé Césaire, founders of the literary journal Tropiques, met with a group of artists and intellectuals fleeing Nazi-occupied France, whose boat had temporarily docked at the West Indian port of Fort-de-France. The refugees included Helena Benitez, André Breton, Wifredo Lam, Jacqueline Lamba, Claude Lévi-Strauss, André Masson, and Victor Serge, among others. Penumbra takes as its point of departure the now mythic hikes the group took in the gouffre d'Absalom valley in Martinique, which served in part as inspiration for Lam's masterpiece, The Jungle. Penumbra is a soundscape of "shadow tones," a psycho-acoustic phenomenon perceived when two real tones create the semblance of a third. The original musical composition by David Lang uses nonlinear distortion of violin sounds to evoke the sensation of walking through that tropical forest. In Graft, thousands of cast blossoms of the Tabebuia chrysantha tree, a common native species in the Caribbean, appear as though a wind had swept them across the gallery floor. Graft alludes to environmental changes set in motion through the interlocking effects of colonial exploitation and global climatic transformation. Systemic deforestation and depletion of the Caribbean's original flora and fauna is one of the primary legacies of colonialism. Nevertheless, the Caribbean remains a biodiversity hotspot and, along with thirty-five other hotspots worldwide (which amount to just 2.4% of the earth's land surface), supports nearly 60% of the world's plant, bird, mammal, reptile, and amphibian species. As rising global temperatures result in more frequent and violently destructive weather, adding even more pressure to the Caribbean, the uncanny presence of tropical tree blossoms in Graft stands as a potent harbinger for the immeasurable losses that continue unabated after centuries of colonial plunder. Measuring 6 feet in height and 70 feet in length, and covering the east and south walls, the exhibition's eponymous work, Cadastre takes electromagnetism as its subject and medium. To make the work, Allora & Calzadilla dropped iron filings on top of a canvas and placed it above an array of copper cables connected to an electrical breaker in the artists' studio in San Juan, which gets its power from the Puerto Rico Electric Power Authority. When the breaker is turned on, the electrical current causes the iron particles to self-organize into a composition of lines and shapes governed by the electromagnetic field. As the Latin title and full subtitle (Meter Number 18257262, Consumption Charge 36.9kWh x $0.02564, Rider FCA-Fuel Charge Adjusted 36.9 kWh x $0.053323, Rider PPCA-Purchase Power Charge Adjusted 36.9kWh x $0.016752, Rider CILTA-Municipalities Adjusted 36.9kWh x $0.002376, Rider SUBA Subsidies $1.084) suggest, the work probes the propriety politics of electricity and the power grid. Cadastre is part of a continuum of multiple sites and actors that the artists are probing through their artistic process working with electricity, from the oil futures market, to the transnational holders of PREPA bond debt, to the local consumers who are forced to pay for the recently privatized power company's fiscal mismanagement. Jennifer Allora (b. 1974, Philadelphia) and Guillermo Calzadilla (b. 1971, Havana) live and work in San Juan, Puerto Rico. Solo exhibitions have taken place at Serpentine Gallery, London; Kunsthalle Zürich, Zürich; Stedelijk Museum, Amsterdam; Haus derKunst, Munich; MoMA - Museum of Modern Art, New York; the Castello de Rivoli Museo d'Arte Contemporanea, Turin; Philadelphia Museum of Art, Philadelphia; MAXXI, Rome; Fundacio Antoni Tapies, Barcelona; Walker Art Center, Minneapolis; Renaissance Society, Chicago; Palais de Tokyo, Paris; Guggenheim Bilbao, Spain; and many others. Allora & Calzadilla represented the United States at the 54th Venice Biennale in 2011. In 2015, they made the site-specific installation Puerto Rican Light (Cueva Vientos), a Dia Art Foundation commission on the southern coast of Puerto Rico. They are preparing a large solo show at the Menil Collection in Houston which opens May 2020.

We are pleased to present, The Cavern of Lost Dreams (nine characters), an exhibition of all new artworks by Swiss artist Claudia Comte. Comprising of sculptures, paintings, and site-specific works, this exhibition highlights the artists multidisciplinary approach to artmaking and perceptive investigation of the materiality of both natural and fabricated elements. Using mediums such as wood, marble, bronze, ceramic, and paint, Comte creates imaginative forms and landscapes that question competing notions of industrial production verses handmade craftsmanship, high versus low culture, and fact versus fiction. For this exhibition, Comte expands her career-long interest in constructing immersive installations that encompass a variety of her creative practices to suggest visual and conceptual dialogues between the various modes of artistic production she employs. Throughout the space, a series of new figurative and abstract sculptures made from differing natural materials adorn each room. The artist creates objects such as biomorphic figures, coral, a motorcycle helmet, a flip flop and an axe out of wood, marble, bronze and ceramics to question ascribed meanings to highbrow materials and seemingly insignificant artifacts of contemporary culture. This specificity of material also connects to Comte's concerns for the environment and how mass production of human-made objects has drastically impacted equilibrium of living organisms on Earth. The artist's sculptures, sitting atop tall, frame-like open plinths made of concrete, demonstrate the Comte's careful attention to the materials she carves with incisive, delicate understanding and appreciation, while suggesting deeper meanings connected to global warming and the detrimental effects humans can have on the environment. Equally significant to Comte's sculptural work is her painting practice, which has become more ambitious and immersive over the last several years. Adoring every wall of the exhibition space is a new site-specific wall painting inspired by the Monument Valley Mountains in Western America. This is the artist's first wall painting to extend beyond a single room and portrays Comte's ever explorative and continuously developing approach to painting. The cartoon-like depiction of this mountain range is inspired by the artist's earliest recollections of landscapes excavated from popular culture her memory, terrains which differed immensely from her wooded Swiss surroundings early in life. Through the use of aerosol spray paint, Comte prompts a compelling tension between graffiti and the quant domesticity of the townhouse to elevate the significance of materials and mediums she continues to experiment with on a variety of scales. Comte also unveils two new works from her Turn and Slip series, consisting of rounded canvases that she paints in flat, monochromatic gradients of black on white in a continuous, circular motion. Together with the artists new sculptural works, the works in this exhibition envelop viewers into the rhythmic, expansive, and carefully constructed worlds Comte conceptualizes. Claudia Comte was born in 1983 in Morges, Switzerland and is currently working and living in Grancy, Switzerland and Berlin, Germany. Recent solo and group exhibitions include Copenhagen Contemporary, Copenhagen (2019); "Zigzags and Diagonals," MOCA Cleveland (2018); "Swiss Performance Now," Kunsthalle Basel (2018); "KölnSkulpture #9," Köln (2017); "La Ligne Claire," Basement Roma (2017); "NOW I WON," Messeplatz, Art Basel (2017); "10 Rooms, 40 Walls, 1059 m2," Kunstmuseum Luzern (2017); Desert X, Palm Springs (2017); "The Language of Things," Public Art Fund, New York (2016); "Easy Heavy III," Haus Konstruktiv, Zurich (2014); "Sharp Sharp, If I were a rabbit, where would I keep my gloves?," BolteLang (2013); and Elevation 1049, Gstaad (2013).

A quantum computer can perform millions of calculations simultaneously. It has been suggested that such a device would be able to simulate paradoxes in science that occur on a scale so small that they are impossible to observe within nature. In 2003, University of Oxford philosopher Nick Bostrom proposed that there are three possible futures for the human race: Civilization collapses before developing technology capable of creating a believable simulation of reality. Civilization exists long enough to create technology capable of creating a believable simulation, but chooses not to use it. Civilization exists long enough to create technology capable of creating a believable simulation, and chooses to use it. In this scenario, multiple simulations would be run, which implies that it's more likely that we are currently living within one of those simulations as opposed to living within the lone base reality. We understand the forward motion of time through the thermodynamic arrow. That means disorder increases over time, which is one of the reasons why we can't travel backwards into the past. The toothpaste can't go back in the tube. We remember where we have been but not where we are going, because the trajectory of the psychological arrow mimics the asymmetrical nature of time. An IBM quantum computer recently created a simulation illustrating that with a tremendous amount of manipulations within an environment, it would theoretically be possible for a single elementary particle to go backwards in time for one millionth of a second. The conditions required for this to happen are extraordinarily unlikely to occur in reality. The allure of this theoretical model is that it offers respite from the real, it affords all of us the luxury of believing that there might be some chance that our transgressions might be reversed, our victories repeated, our most absurd fantasies realized in a place that lies just beyond our understanding of what is possible. Or maybe this is all just a practice run.

"More and less in art do not depend on how many varieties of significance are present, but on the intensity and depth of such significances, be they few or many, as are present." —Clement Greenberg, "Abstract, Representational, and so forth," 1954 We are pleased to present Abstract, Representational, and so forth, an exhibition that highlights a selection of contemporary artists who work with ceramics. Focusing on examples that are hung on the wall, the ceramics in this exhibition portray how this particularly malleable medium is able to transform in various modes and interact with architectural space as both a support and a means to elaborate different forms. Artists exhibiting include: Sarah Crowner Magdalena Suarez Frimkess Alteronce Gumby Mary Heilmann Lena Henke Cameron Jamie Liz Larner Andrew Lord Nick Mauss Luigi Ontani Rosemarie Trockel Betty Woodman Taking up various traditions, such as the relief, the mosaic, or the bust, the artworks in this exhibition expand the relationship between the practice of ceramics and the structure of the white cube. These works move from the abstract to the figurative and query the objecthood of sculptures: some present glazed surfaces akin to paintings, while others further this questioning in hand-built objects that extend in three dimensions. Abstract, Representational, and so forth brings together a range of artists whose ceramics often fit within a multi-disciplinary practice that includes painting, sculpture, photography, and installation, but focuses on the technical, formal, and conceptual elements of their ceramic works. This show is a continuation of the gallery's previous exhibitions of ceramics, which includes, "Makers and Modelers: Works in Ceramic," from 2007, and "Prima Materia" in 2012. Tracking the resurgent interest of ceramics outside craft traditions, this exhibition includes a mix of artists from different regions and moments in their careers to continue investigating and demonstrating new approaches to ceramic sculpting practices.

We are pleased to present Porous Structures, an exhibition of new sculptures and site-specific works by Damián Ortega. This show explores Ortega's longstanding interest in visually dissecting the underlying sociohistorical narratives embedded in everyday materials. Including a mix of works created with sand, cement, brick, clay, and crystals, Porous Structures excavates the materiality of permeable structures and objects, and how the cultural, political, and socio-economic implications of manufactured and natural constructions impact humankind in both a deeply personal and universal way. For this exhibition, Ortega presents a series of distinct bodies of work that demonstrate the artist's incisive approach to his mediums, as well as his uncanny ability to transcend ordinary materials into objects with complex narratives. A series of cement-brick sculptures depicting geological figures such as the reinterpreted topography of a mountain range, glaciers, volcanos and valleys, highlight the ways in which human intervention and environmental erosion impact the creation of both natural and manmade objects. His use of brick is particularly significant and recurs through his oeuvre; Ortega recontextualizes building materials to highlight how raw matter can be transformed into structures or systems for habitation. Modern sublease, a helix-shaped, staircase-like structure made with cement and clay, similarly connects to the artist's interest in architecture and construction materials. As the viewer moves around the work, small crevices are revealed throughout the staircase, mimicking the architectural structure of a wasp's nest or the geometry of modernist urban planning, transforming this undulating, wall-like structure into a place for community and collaboration. In his monumental new site-specific work, Irregular emplacements, which consists of two 7-foot-tall mountainous structures made with sand and cement cubes, Ortega conflates the process of creating sculpture with an economics of positive and negative spaces that the viewer enters into. This installation aims to question what constitutes a sculpture, and highlights the significance of both the physical object on display as well as the negative space surrounding the sculpture. Ranging from the intimate to the monumental, Ortega's works on view are both cultural artifacts and living objects in permanent transformation, existing as open structures that react and converse with the space inside and outside their physicality, housing and containing change over time. Damián Ortega was born in 1967 in Mexico and currently lives and works in Mexico City and Berlin. He has had solo exhibitions at notable international venues including: Garage Museum of Contemporary Art, Moscow; The Fruitmarket Gallery, Edinburgh, United Kingdom; Museo Reina-Sofia, Madrid; Museu de Arte Moderna do Rio de Janeiro; HangarBicocca, Milan; Museo Jumex, Mexico City; The Cleveland Museum of Art; the Barbican, London; the Institute of Contemporary Art, Boston; Tate Modern, London; Kunsthalle Basel; Institute of Contemporary Art, Philadelphia; and Centre Pompidou, Paris. Ortega participated in the 55th Venice Biennale (2013); the 27th São Paulo Biennial (2006); the 4th Berlin Biennial (2006); and the 50th Venice Biennale (2003).

We are pleased to present an exhibition of rare and seminal designs by Italo-Brazilian artist Lina Bo Bardi in collaboration with Giancarlo Palanti, accompanied by a selection of important works by artists whom worked concurrently to Bo Bardi in Brazil. Best known for her prolific career as an architect and designer, Bo Bardi dedicated herself to art's emancipation from the predilection for western modernism in favor of the combination of contemporary formalism mixed with regional vernacular. Lina Bo Bardi's work represents the creative and social modernity throughout Mid-Century Brazil, an era characterized by cultural and artistic experimentation, and this exhibition demonstrates her important place in history. Born in Rome in 1914 and educated at the University of Rome's School of Architecture, Achillina Bo began her career in Milan, where she worked in collaboration with fellow architects such as Carlo Pagani and Gio Ponti, and later started her own architecture firm. In the aftermath of World War II, the artist and her husband, Pietro Maria Bardi, closed their practice in Italy and travelled to Brazil, which became their permanent home soon thereafter. It was in São Paulo that Bo Bardi opened her renowned architecture firm. While in Brazil, she began to incorporate furniture design into her work, and in 1948 founded her design practice, Studio de Arte e Arquitetura Palma, with fellow Italian architect Giancarlo Palanti, which marked one of the many breakthrough moments of her career. Throughout her life, Bo Bardi established herself as a figurehead of modern design, constructing countless private and public spaces, most notably the São Paulo Museum of Art (MASP) and the SESC Pompéia, a former barrel factory transformed into a large cultural and sports center. Transcending western and European dominance prevalent throughout traditional design practices, Bo Bardi discovered a renewed vitality in the natural logic of Brazilian design and honed her unique approach to the built environment. Bo Bardi translated her architectural expertise and inspiration from her Brazilian surroundings into the iconic designs for which she is most prominently known to this day. Her artistic practice, rooted in the tenants of functionality and accessibility, mimics the natural and cultural beauty she experienced in Brazil. Her designs celebrate the reduction and rawness of nature, the former in the use of natural Brazilian woods, and the latter in their simplistic and practical shapes. As both an architect and a designer, Bo Bardi bridged these practices in her holistic approach to construction, realizing both the interiors and exteriors of her most acclaimed projects, the most well-known being MASP. A highlight of Gladstone Gallery's exhibition includes the original MASP chairs designed for the museum's auditorium. Each chair, made of Jacaranda wood and leather upholstery, is foldable and stackable, exemplifying Bo Bardi's emphasis on functionality. This exhibition demonstrates Bo Bardi's creation of a liberated modernism, imbued with the cultural, natural and spiritual fabric of Brazil. Alongside this exhibition of important pieces by Bo Bardi and Palanti is a carefully considered selection of work from some of Brazil's most significant modernist artists who worked around the same time as Bo Bardi and Palanti, some of which were included in the Grupo Frente. This presentation includes artists such as Hercules Barsotti, Sergio Camargo, Aluísio Carvão, Lygia Clark, and Alfredo Volpi. This exhibition was realized in close collaboration with Nilufar Gallery, Milan and the Instituto Bardi / Casa de Vidro. Lina Bo Bardi was an Italian born architect who spent most of her career in São Paulo until her death in 1992. Bo Bardi attended the University of Rome's School of Architecture in 1939. During her lifetime, Bo Bardi completed countless architectural and design projects including Casa de Vidro, 1951; São Paulo Museum of Art, 1968; Centro de Lazer Fabrica da Pompeia (SESC Pompiea), 1982; Teatro Oficina, 1984. Bo Bardi has also been the subject of solo exhibitions at Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo; British Council, London; AzW Architekturzentrum Wien, Vienna; SAM Swiss Architecture Museum, Basel; Pavilion de l'Arsenal, Paris; Arkitektur – och designcentrum, Stockholm; ARCAM, Amsterdam; DAZ, Berlin; Triennale di Milano, Milan; Palazzo Giacomelli, Treviso; Graham Foundation, Chicago; and Miami Center for Architecture and Design, Miami.

We are pleased to present an exhibition of new work by Anicka Yi entitled We Have Never Been Individual, her first with the gallery. Through her work, Anicka Yi directs us to the dissolving boundaries between the human, animal, and vegetable and emphasizes that the question of who and what we are – what animals and bacteria and plants and machines are – is an open and urgent question. By way of her technosensual explorations of hybridization and contamination, Yi repositions the human in terms of vulnerable co-subjectivity, interdependency, and agitated symbiosis with other lively entities. As discoveries are made in the fields of microbiome research, artificial intelligence, and animal and plant cognition, traditional ideas of individual autonomy and human exceptionalism appear wholly inadequate. Fluid entanglements between lively and intelligent entities at both the micro and macro scale reveal to us that there is no defined center, no single inner voice or single self at the helm. Neat and tidy categories no longer serve as our current models struggle to keep pace with the rapid mutations of our bodies, technologies, and environments. In We Have Never Been Individual, Anicka Yi explores the potency and precariousness of entangled life in multiple spatial and temporal scales. Suspended throughout the gallery, Yi's series of glowing spherical sculptures are upholstered with a stretched leather-like kelp, calling attention to the ecological history and exciting potential uses of algae, a powerful and shapeshifting entity comprising the largest biomass on the planet. As green and gold light shines through the variated kelp surfaces, the texture of scratches and scars on the "skin" of each sculpture suggest embattled aquatic life and remind us of our primordial crawl from the sea. Shadows of small animatronic insects flicker inside the sculpture walls, offering a humorous nod toward notions of autonomy and artificial intelligence, while also suggesting the presence of parasites, symbionts, or hive colonizers. In a second series, Yi creates minimalist microalgae and cyanobacteria aquascapes, focusing on the symbiotic partnership between these microorganisms – the basis of all terrestrial life on earth. Drawing inspiration from algae-exploiting, solar-powered sea slugs and contemporary aquaculture practices, Yi's aquascapes are staged as mini-bioreactors, suggesting the human capacity to harness algae as a food and energy source, and hinting towards a more intimate symbiosis in the future. Within these living paintings are nested glass incubation chambers and fabricated insect eggs, evoking associations with bodily fluids, gestation, and disease. In contrast to these minimalist scapes, Yi includes a set of intricate and richly colored bacterial light panels. Bacterial cultures are UV-printed on the surface of the panels, interweaving with an abstracted architectural pattern that references computer networks and urban infrastructural grids. Central to the exhibition are the hypertextural and tactile Techno-Geo sculptures, which muddy the imperfect categorizations of natural, synthetic and trans-natural through a collage of organic, geological, and industrial elements. Fossilized remnants of animals and plants emphasize blurred ecological boundaries as evolutionary trajectories are compressed, accelerated, and expanded through time. Delicate, connection points between the sculptural components underscore the unhinged, teetering balance between living species and the damaged and hazardous terrain of manufactured environments. The uncertain distinction between natural elements and synthetic intervention suggests that the status of "natural" is always changeable. Whether through simulation, biomorphism, or mimicry – nature is a concept that is constantly in drag as itself. In We Have Never Been Individual, assemblages masquerade as wholes, robots pose as insects, plant flesh mimics animal flesh, life resembles death and vice versa. Within this matrix of shifting impersonations, the modern mythology of the human proves to be an outdated disguise for something at once smaller, greater, and more complex than we had imagined. Anicka Yi was born in Seoul, South Korea, and currently lives and works in New York City. Her work has been the subject of numerous solo exhibitions at institutions around the world, including the Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, New York; Fridericianum, Kassel, Germany; Kunsthalle Basel, Switzerland; List Visual Arts Center, MIT, Cambridge, Massachusetts; The Kitchen, New York; and the Cleveland Museum of Art, Cleveland, Ohio. Group exhibition venue highlights include the Museum of Modern Art, New York; Migros Museum fur Gegenwartskunst, Zürich, Switzerland; Walker Art Center, Minneapolis, Minnesota; Witte de With Contemporary Art, Rotterdam, The Netherlands; Fondation Louis Vuitton, Paris, France; Institute of Contemporary Art / Boston, Massachusetts; New Museum, New York; Palais De Tokyo, Paris, France; the 2017 Whitney Biennial, New York; K11 Art Foundation, Hong Kong; the 12th Biennale de Lyon; Studiolo, Zurich; MoCA, North Miami; Museum fur Gegenwartskunst, Basel; White Flag Projects, Saint Louis; SculptureCenter, New York and White Columns, New York, amongst others. In 2016, Yi was awarded the Hugo Boss Prize in recognition of the power and singularity of the experimental body of work she has produced over the past decade. This May, her work will be featured in Venice at the 58th International Art Exhibition, titled May You Live In Interesting Times, curated by Ralph Rugoff, on view from May 11 until November 24, 2019.

We are pleased to present its first exhibition with Argentine-Swiss artist Vivian Suter. Comprised exclusively of mixed media paintings, this show furthers Suter's singular style of installation, in which canvases flood the gallery space, creating an enveloping mise-en-scène of visual characters that intermingle, juxtapose, and cavort with one another. Composed individually, the works on view – through their unique display – inevitably become an interconnected painterly biome, openly inviting gallery-goers into the artist's cosmos. A testament to Suter's decades-long career, these paintings run the canonical gamut, from Abstract Expressionist to Color Field to Art Informel. However, eschewing any artistic predecessors, Suter draws her inspiration directly from her natural surroundings, most deeply the Guatemalan rainforest where the artist has lived and worked for more than thirty years. The visual manifestation of this environmental stimulus is manifold: not only does Suter gesturally reference the sun, rainstorms, wind, and trees throughout her paintings, but eroded dirt, animal life, rain water, and plant matter also find their way onto the untreated surfaces of her canvases. A disruption of material hierarchy, Suter places the components of her studio on equal footing with the biological world. In keeping with the elemental construction of her paintings, Suter similarly eliminates any pecking order concerning the architecture of the gallery space. The walls, floor, and ceiling all receive equal billing on the artist's stage. Through this elision of surface, Suter transposes the experience of viewing art into an immersive adventure, in which paintings are invariably (re)contextualized based on their placement over, alongside, under, and across from one another. All undated, each canvas on view is part of Suter's far-reaching ecosystem, a network of compositions that visually and physically display the abstracted story of their creation. A simultaneous presentation of Suter's work is on view in New York as part of the High Line's yearlong exhibition, En Plein Air, and can be seen installed over the park's southern access staircase at Gansevoort Street through March 2020. Vivian Suter was born in Buenos Aires, Argentina; studied in Basel, Switzerland; and currently lives and works in Panajachel, Guatemala. Solo exhibitions of the artist's work have been held at numerous international institutions, including: The Power Plant, Toronto; Art Institute of Chicago, Illinois; Jewish Museum, New York; Kunsthalle Basel, Switzerland; Kunstmuseum Olten, Switzerland; and Kunstmuseum des Kantons Thurgau, Kartause Ittingen, Warth, Switzerland. In the coming year, solo installations of Suter's paintings will be staged at MUDAM, Luxembourg; the Institute of Contemporary Art, Boston, Massachusetts; and Tate Liverpool, United Kingdom. Publications

We are pleased to present an exhibition of works on paper by Keith Haring, most of which have not been shown since they were created in the late 1980s. Made for his iconic Pop Shop, the series of drawings in this show served as the underlying artwork for prints and other Pop Shop merchandise. Depicting a variety of forms and figures in the artist's signature style, these black and white compositions demonstrate Haring's career-long exploration of the medium of drawing and his astute ability to create a unique version of reality using a distinct visual language. Haring's drawing practice first gained widespread attention through his iconic subway artworks that began to appear throughout New York City's transit stations in the early 1980s, but he also created a number of intimately sized drawings in his studio that were equally significant to the evolution of his career. Haring's process involved an almost automatic form of artmaking, creating series of drawings or collages on paper with sumi ink or gouache. The visual language and many of the motifs from these drawings were also used in Haring's Pop Shop, which he opened in Soho in 1986. Many of the figures repeated throughout his drawings were also displayed in a variety of forms at this downtown boutique on the walls and on the accoutrements for sale. Haring's impeccable aptitude for precision and confident approach to artmaking resulted in a mesmerizing array of compositions. Often confined by a bold, black rectangular frame, the figures in Haring's drawings appear to push against these predetermined boundaries, highlighting his ability to constantly think outside the parameters of art to include a broader audience. The drawings on view in the show include both familiar and lesser known motifs: human figures in space, barking dogs, swimming dolphins, scissors, industrial machines, and angels. These equally sized compositions offer a diverse selection of narratives and characters that demonstrate Haring's ability to address complex, socially-engaged, and timely themes such as sexuality, religion, economics, and technology. On Haring's drawing practice, art historian David Galloway notes, "[His drawings] constitute an oeuvre of immense skill, authority, and diversity, incorporating all of the familiar Haring pictographs and themes, but also introducing aspects of form and content considerably less familiar to viewers."(1) These two-dimensional works demonstrate Haring's career-long curiosity for experimentation and constant return to the medium of drawing to continually push the limits of what he was able to create and imagine. A catalogue with an essay by writer Brad Gooch about the historical significance of Haring's Pop Shop and drawing practice will accompany the exhibition. Keith Haring was born on May 4, 1958 in Reading, Pennsylvania and died at the age of thirty-one of AIDS-related illnesses in New York City in 1990. Since his death, his work has been the subject of major solo exhibitions around the world, most recently at the Albertina Museum, Vienna. From 2013 through 2015, Haring was the subject of an international touring exhibition, "Keith Haring: The Political Line," which traveled to the Musée d'Art Moderne de la Ville de Paris; the de Young Museum, San Francisco; and the Kunsthalle der Hypo-Kulturstiftung, Munich. In 1994, the Castello di Rivoli hosted a major solo exhibition of Haring's work, and in 1997, the Whitney Museum of American Art staged a retrospective of Haring's work that traveled internationally. In 2012, "Keith Haring: 1978-1982", co-organized in 2010 by the Contemporary Arts Center, Cincinnati and the Kunsthalle Wien, Vienna, traveled to the Brooklyn Museum of Art. Haring's work is in major private and public collections, including The Museum of Modern Art, New York; The Whitney Museum of American Art, New York; Los Angeles County Museum of Art, Los Angeles; The Art Institute of Chicago, Chicago; The Bass Museum, Miami; Centre Georges Pompidou, Paris; Ludwig Museum, Cologne; and Stedelijk Museum, Amsterdam. This June, Tate Liverpool will host the artist's first major solo exhibition in the United Kingdom, on view through November 2019. (1)David Galloway, "Drawing the Line: The Graphic Legacy of Keith Haring," Keith Haring: All-Over, 2009.

Gladstone Gallery and Gladstone 64 are pleased to present a new exhibition by Philippe Parreno spanning across its New York galleries. At Gladstone Gallery on 24th street, Parreno presents a new film, Anywhen In a Time Colored Space (2019). This work is a continuation of his work Anywhen (2016), filmed by renowned Iranian-French cinematographer Darius Khondji and featuring the voice of Nina Conti, actor, comedienne and ventriloquist. Performing the artist's own writing integrated with fragments of James Joyce, the amalgamation of words read by Conti makes explicit Parreno's interest in artificial, digital, and organic matter, and particularly how these forms of life communicate. The film is comprised of long sequences of a live cuttlefish (Sepia Oficinalis — a Mediterranean species of cephalopod) that can change the surface of its body—responding to outside forces such as light, sound and vibration, seemingly projecting the thoughts contained in the monologue. Much of the film focuses on the cuttlefish, which Parreno first kept in a tank in his studio. These mollusks have evolved a complex system of dermal units under neural, hormonal, and muscular control to produce an astonishing variety of body patterns. With parallels to the pixels on a television screen, cephalopod chromatophores can be coordinated to produce dramatic, dynamic, and rhythmic displays. As colors ripple through the cuttlefish body, creating graceful, delicate gestures with its tentacles, the Mollusck appears to interact with the viewer through an incomprehensible eye, as Conti's broken voice-over narrates the abstract texts. The decontextualized script provides a hypnotic, almost alien sound effect as the cuttlefish changes and communicates through its skin. Originally produced for the Tate Modern Turbine Hall Hyundai Commission in 2016, this new iteration of Anywhen has been completely re-edited and reformatted from its original context and incorporates Parreno's recent exploration of Artificial Intelligence. The end of each showing of Anywhen In a Time Colored Space incorporates "Next Frame Prediction," recalling a time when videocassettes needed rewinding after each viewing and illuminated a room with bright static. This dedicated tool generates film footage by predicting the next frame from the previous and applying it recursively. By the end of the exhibition, the AI may produce an additional a copy of the film, or a wholly new idiosyncratic assemblage. This new iteration of "rewinding" becomes a way remembering of time, while the exhibition moves into speculative realms. Select walls of the gallery are covered in a phosphorescent wallpaper depicting repeating black irises. The pattern comes from Parreno's 2012 film, Marilyn, which conjures up the presence of Marilyn Monroe in the set of a suite at the Waldorf Astoria Hotel in New York, where the actress lived in the 1950s. The ghostly figure that repeats throughout this work represents signature components of Parreno's practice: blurring the lines between the past and present, and the real and unreal, by bringing the past of the hotel and the hypothetical future of the film into the gallery. At Gladstone 64, Parreno presents a new sculpture from his Fraught Times series, which he has experimented with since the late 1990s. The new work, Fraught Times, For Eleven Months of the Year it's an Artwork and in December it's Christmas (2019), reimagines this recurring project in an entirely new form, though one visually and conceptually connected to his earliest works from this series. This latest iteration is once again a hyper-realistic simulacrum of a traditional Christmas tree, replete with delicately placed, vibrantly colored ornaments and a makeshift stand of a pot and palette. While earlier trees had large, overexaggerated branches that balanced large clumps of snow later trees were devoid of it, making the tree on view now enact an eerie return to the repressed gesture. This newest version of Fraught Times returns the work to its original conceptual structure, with snow, colorful glass ornaments, and a palette bottom joined together for the first time in steel. While seemingly lit from within, making it appear as if it freshly brought in from the outdoors, the trees continual presence speaks to the degradation of the aura, its ritual overly rehearsed to the point of creating new conditions of meaning. In a sense, the tree's constant iteration creates continually shifting contexts which speak to the same unknown terrain of the continually regenerated ending of Anywhen. Alongside this new work are a series of two snowdrifts and a pond of water in glass extend the illusion. The two gallery spaces are linked by the text said by the ventriloquist of the film - heard in the film in the 24th street gallery and read in a "talking label" on 64th street.

We are pleased to announce an exhibition by Ian Cheng, the artist's debut with the gallery, and the United States premiere of BOB (Bag of Beliefs). The first in a new series of artificial lifeforms, BOB takes the form of a chimeric branching serpent. BOB advances Cheng's use of simulation to focus on an individual agent's capacity to deal with surprise: the subjective difference between expectations and perception. Over the course of its lifetime, BOB's body, mind, and personality evolve to better confront the continuous stream of life's surprises, and metabolize them into familiar routines. Crucially, BOB incorporates the tutoring influence of the viewer to help offset BOB's temptation to only satisfy its immediate impulses and childhood biases. As BOB dies many deaths – whether through failures of personality, bad parenting, random accident, or a life well lived – BOB may become synonymous with a reoccurring pattern of behavior, common across all BOB lifetimes, thereby manifesting the undying eternal characteristic of a god. BOB features a unique model of AI composed of a congress of motivating "demons" and an inductive engine capable of learning rule-based beliefs from sensory experiences. Each demon functions as a micro-personality who obsessively attempts to fulfill its own micro-story. An eater demon forages for the food, a flight demon evades the threat, an explorer demon seeks that which lacks beliefs, among many others. Together the demons compete with one another for control of BOB's body. The controlling demon operates under the premise that progress = minimal surprise: the smallest difference between the beliefs required by its micro-story and its current sensory perceptions. Great surprises upset BOB, causing emotional upheaval, but in turn signal BOB to update its beliefs. Over its lifetime, BOB may learn to apply its beliefs onto even the most outlandish stimuli, choosing to infer even a bad first impression and avoid being thrown into chaos in the present, but at the cost of further surprisal in the future. Viewers who wish to influence BOB's life may do so via BOB Shrine, a free iOS app available worldwide. Once downloaded, opened, and named, BOB Shrine allows viewers to publish patterns of stimuli to BOB, as well as caption their stimuli with a parental directive. BOB Shrine then automates the production of stimuli for BOB to choose without any further necessary engagement from the viewer. In return, BOB deposits special rewards to shrines it judges to be trustworthy parental forces. Visit for more details. The exhibition continues upstairs with production drawings from the conception, design, and development of BOB, shown here for the first time. Ian Cheng (born 1984, Los Angeles) lives and works in New York. Recent solo exhibitions include Serpentine Galleries, London (2018); Julia Stoschek Collection, Berlin (2018); MoMA PS1, New York (2017); Carnegie Museum of Art, Pittsburgh (2017); Espace Louis Vuitton, Munich (2017); Migros Museum, Zurich (2016); Fondazione Sandretto Re Rebaudengo, Turin (2015). Video Ian Cheng: BOB ● ● ● Ian Cheng: BOB at Gladstone Gallery January 31 - March 23, 2019 530 West 21st Street, New YorkIan Cheng: BOB at Gladstone Gallery, New York

We are pleased to present an exhibition of works by Guo Fengyi, the artist's first exhibition with the gallery since announcing their representation in 2018. This show visually and conceptually explores the three major bodies of work that Guo created during her lifetime, and demonstrates the breadth and complexity of her ever-explorative practice and long-lasting impact on contemporary Chinese art. Born in 1942 in Xi'an, China, Guo was a self-trained artist who did not begin her artistic career until the latter portion of her life. Guo worked at a rubber factory until the age of 39, when she developed severe arthritis that forced her into early retirement. As a way of alleviating pain and hoping to continue working with her hands, Guo started to practice qigong, a Chinese system of physical exercise and breath control connected to tai chi. While engaging in qigong, Guo would enter into a hallucinatory state of being that prompted a series of transcendent visualizations. Guo would attempt to capture the figures she saw on various scrolls, both small and large scale. This practice of artmaking helped Guo connect her mind and body, an exercise much like the Surrealist practice of automatic drawing, which was developed in Europe during the early 20th century. Early in her career, Guo created many of her drawings on the backs of calendars and discarded sheets of paper, visualizing imaginative depictions of unseen objects and concepts: human organs, the underworld, and energy channels. She then began to use readymade Chinese scrolls to make ornate, free formed drawings, mostly in back and white, that helped Guo formalize her signature stylistic approach to drawing. She used these scrolls in untraditional ways, however, enabling Guo to employ an otherworldly method of production that distinguished her practice and ability to invent her fantastical subjects. Guo's third and most prolific series of works were created on rice paper and depict different figures connected to specific locations or powerful energies. This practice led to the creation of vibrant and deeply personal portraits of close companions and anonymous characters alike. After years of showing her work throughout mainland China, Guo began to receive international recognition for her artistic practice through a series of important museum exhibitions and collaborations, at venues and festivals, including the Gwangju Biennial (2010); The Museum of Everything, London (2009), Mori Art Museum, Japan (2009); Kunsthaus Graz, Austria (2007); Shenzhen Biennial (2006); Taipei Biennale (2005); Yokohama Triennial, Japan (2005); Prague International Biennale of Contemporary Art (2005); and the Museum of Contemporary Art, Lyon, France (2004). In 2002, Guo worked with Judy Chicago on a multi-venue event for Long March Project. Guo's works depict a series of elaborately drawn characters, such as dragons, mythological figures, ornately dressed humans that embodied both humanoid and otherworldly qualities. Designed with exacting details and vibrant colors, these whimsical subjects also connected to Guo's research of I Ching (Book of Changes in English), an ancient Chinese divination text and the oldest of the Chinese classics. The subjects she imagined relate to traditional Chinese systems of thought, namely cosmology, divination, acupuncture energy maps, sage kings, geomancy and dynastic grave sites, all of which have become dispensable in a modernizing China. After her death in 2010, the Contemporary Art Gallery in Vancouver, Canada organized the first North American survey of Guo's work that opened in 2012. Other group exhibition venue highlights after her passing include The Museum of Old and New Art, Tasmania, Australia (2017); Kunsthal Rotterdam (2016); Carnegie International, Carnegie Museum of Art (2013); Hayward Gallery, London (2013); The 55th Venice Biennale (2013); and the Asian Art Museum, San Francisco (2012). ​

"The subjects had, indeed, risen vividly on my mind. As I saw them with the spiritual eye, before I attempted to embody them, they were striking…" —Charlotte Brontë, Jane Eyre (1847) We are pleased to present an exhibition of new sculpture and drawings by Paloma Varga Weisz. Her idiosyncratic, anachronistic, and thoughtful wood carvings utilize traditional techniques, used for centuries in the creation of ecclesiastical sculpture. Varga Weisz, however, works against the grain of tradition in subtle ways through figures that draw on obscure references to art history, current events, and medieval iconography. Endowing each of these figures with a palpable psychology, her hand manifests different interior states and affective postures. Seen together with her drawings, Varga Weisz's practice seems populated with repertory company of surreal players, akin to neo-platonic intermediaries moving between imagination's hinterland to our reality via her intuitive touch. For this exhibition, Varga Weisz creates fantastical animal-human hybrids that emerge from an imaginative terrain wherein the miraculous shapes of the title shed light on both the chimerical and the humane. These iterations of arcane relics transform the gallery space, inviting viewers into what critic Alessandro Rabottini describes as "the vastness of…inner experience, that nervous system of simultaneity which is out experience once it shifts away from the here-and-now and occupies a space in which memory, present, and imagination coexist." Whether left in their original wooden state or surfaced with metallic leafing or polychrome, the figures emerge from this place of interior wonder through Varga Weisz's acuity for both craft and fine art traditions. Perhaps a collection of strange figures held in the wunderkammer of the mind, each sculpture possesses both a distinct bearing and semblance of relationships to each other—a family of characters that animate darker strata of being: a Janus-like head of multiplying faces recalls both mythological creatures from Northern European illuminations and Brancusi's curvilinear modernist sculpture. Often removing figures from their original context, Varga Weisz appropriates both well-known and fancifully idiomatic tropes and reconfigures them as a constellation of archetypes that elucidate representations of femininity, history, and the grotesque. It is in a strange time/place where her practice resides; the twilight liminality of dreams and realities where the known and the unknown meet and feel estrangingly akin to each of us. Paloma Varga Weisz lives and works in Düsseldorf, Germany. Her work has been presented in major solo exhibitions at the Castello di Rivoli, Turin; Salzburger Kunstverein; Kunstmuseum Kurhaus Kleve; Skulpturenhalle, Thomas Schütte Foundation, Neuss/Holzheim, Germany; the Douglas Hyde Gallery, Dublin; the Museum Morsbroich, Leverkusen, Germany (with Rosemarie Trockel). She has been included in group exhibitions at the Museum of Modern Art, New York; the Hayward Gallery, London; Kunstsammlung Nordrhein-Westfalen, Düsseldorf; Whitechapel, London; the Venice Biennale; and the Berlin Biennale. She trained at Staatliche Kunstakademie, Düsseldorf. In the fall of 2019, she will be the subject of a solo mid-career retrospective at the Bonnenfantenmuseum in Maastricht, Netherlands.

We are pleased to present an exhibition of new wall paintings by Claudia Comte, the artist's first exhibition devoted solely to her painting practice. In the beginning was the wall. Before geo-politics, Pink Floyd or wall-drawing was the structure itself: a divider between us and the rest of the world, it builds on the promise of all civilization, of protection and enclosure, of distinguishing that which we have claimed as ours from that which is not. It is the wall, along with its agrarian cousin the fence that separates the mentalities of pirates and farmers, of those who settle and those who raid. How we celebrate that enclosure and how it has been breached – at various times by optics, religion and force – has been the subject of artists since time immemorial. Delving back 32,000 years into Herzog's Cave of Forgotten Dreams we find in Chauvet the imprint of hunter-gatherers who already mastered the kinetic language of repetition, the stop-frame evolution of one form into another, an intuitive understanding of the graphic math that Fibonacci would sequence in the eleventh century. Fast-forward and we begin to witness the slow millennial long drift as art gradually detaches from the cave walls and sacred frescoed architectures to a land in a frame somewhere between the auction house and designer couch. So what life could possibly be breathed into such ancient form and what might that tell us about the script of existences for which the cathedra of church and cave have been supplanted by the geometric conventions of a contemporary social space? What would it mean to transfer the cadences of a digital age directly onto white walls of a secular conscience? How can the architectural vitrine once stripped of objects come alive to the pulse of choreography, the dance of surface and volume? These are just some of the questions that flicker between the lines of Claudia Comte's orchestration of ever morphing, syncopations of contour and form. The writing is on the wall but the language is of mathematics and universal consciousness. Even when the patterns moired interference of nature and culture forces the eye deep into the graphic circuitry there is a conscious avoidance of illusion or three-dimensional effect. Here surface no longer delivers itself as the exterior of the object it encloses but rather as a thing in and of itself, vibrant and alive with the presence of its architectural condition. And so Comte's version of the cave feels more alien than ancient, more like the moment at which Robert Moog broke free from the sine-wave of the transistorized Theremin to create a new sound by breaking down its process into a number of functional blocks which could be carried out by standardized modules. Squares, circles, golden sections, fractals rhythms and algorithms start to interact and synthesize. Surfaces seduce themselves. Line leads us along the metamorphic edge of things. As straight lines curve and geometric forms begin to round off, so the unity and complexity of the spaces we inhabit are teased and patterned into a kind of singular eloquence, a visual symphony of sensual logic a contemporary cave of as yet unremembered dreams. —Neville Wakefield, 2018 Claudia Comte was born in 1983 in Morges, Switzerland and is currently working and living in Grancy, Switzerland and Berlin, Germany. Recent solo and group exhibitions include Zigzags and Diagonals, MOCA Cleveland (2018), Swiss Performance Now, Kunsthalle Basel (2018), KölnSkulpture #9, Köln (2017), La Ligne Claire, Basement Roma (2017), NOW I WON, Messeplatz, Art Basel (2017), 10 Rooms, 40 Walls, 1059 m2, Kunstmuseum Luzern (2017), DesertX, Palm Springs (2017), Catch The Tail By The Tiger, König Galerie, Berlin (2016), The Language of Things, Public Art Fund, New York (2016), Easy Heavy III, Haus Konstruktiv, Zurich (2014), Sharp Sharp, If I were a rabbit, where would I keep my gloves?, BolteLang (2013) and Elevation 1049, Gstaad (2013).

Foundation for Contemporary Arts (FCA), the not-for-profit organization founded in 1963 by Jasper Johns and John Cage (1912-1992) that provides grants to artists, is pleased to announce its sixteenth benefit exhibition, Adam McEwen Selects: Exhibition and Sale to Benefit the Foundation for Contemporary Arts, opening November 29, 2018 at Gladstone Gallery in Chelsea. A list of the 107 participating artists follows below. The works will be offered for sale (not auction). In line with FCA's founding fund-raising model proceeds will directly support FCA's grant-making programs. In the spirit of FCA's "artists for artists" history, FCA invited artist Adam McEwen to curate the exhibition. London-born McEwen lives and works in New York and is known for work that resides somewhere between the celebratory and the funereal. McEwen has been a generous supporter of FCA for many years, and donated works to four past benefits. McEwen asked FCA co-founder Jasper Johns and FCA Board member Glenn Ligon for works that each serve as reference points for the exhibition, which will include a range of established, mid-career, and emerging artists. McEwen writes: The Foundation for Contemporary Arts, which Jasper Johns started in 1963, was the first arts organization that set out to encourage artists to offer their work in the cause of helping other artists. When I invited the artists in this show to donate works, it seemed impossible, given the size of the space, to attempt any kind of curatorial theme, and also pointless. But I wanted some point of departure, if only to make it easier, for myself, to think about it. Jasper Johns's work seemed a logical place to look. I remembered a painting by him that I'd seen several years earlier called Montez Singing. The painting is light and airy, pale yellow and pink, two eyes, a nose and mouth, a small sign hanging in the center with a diagram of a sailboat. I think there's sand in the paint. I remembered it as being an optimistic painting, although that may have been a misreading on my part; it seemed at least resolute, while also giving nothing away. I asked Jasper Johns if he had anything relating to this painting, and he said he had a slight sketch for it that he was willing to show and donate. As a counterpoint to that, I asked Glenn Ligon about a neon work of his called One Black Day, which reads Nov. 6, 2012 (the neon glass painted black), referring to election day in 2012. It was made before the election. The neon was only lit on that one day. I was struck by the way this work – on the surface, punning – is simultaneously optimistic and melancholy. Also by the way its resonance has deepened in the time since it was made. I asked Glenn Ligon if he might have a drawn version of the neon, which he did. I thought of these works as two poles casting out a spectrum of response to the world around us today. They might provide two radiating attitudes, with an intersecting area between them, into which or against which many other kinds of work could be placed. ​ —Adam McEwen, October 2018 The mission of the Foundation for Contemporary Arts is to encourage, sponsor, and promote innovative work in the arts created and presented by individuals, groups, and organizations. FCA depends on artists to fulfill its mission; to date, over 1,000 artists have contributed paintings, sculptures, drawings, prints, and photographs to help fund grant programs that directly support individual artists working in dance, music/sound, performance art/theater, poetry, and the visual arts. Thus, FCA remains the only institution of its kind: created and sustained by artists to benefit other artists. The current Directors of the Foundation for Contemporary Arts are: Cecily Brown, Anne Collier, Anthony B. Creamer III, Anne Dias, Agnes Gund, Jasper Johns, Jennie C. Jones, Julian Lethbridge, Glenn Ligon, Dean Moss, James Welling, and T.J. Wilcox. The Foundation is a 501(c)(3) charitable organization. Participating artists (in alphabetical order): Rita Ackerman, Derrick Adams, Yuji Agematsu, Uri Aran, Matias Argañaraz, Korakrit Arunanondchai, Lutz Bacher, Fia Backström, Darren Bader, Julia Benjamin, Huma Bhabha, Robert Bittenbender, Nayland Blake, Monica Bonvicini, Lizzi Bougatsos, Andrea Bowers, Cecily Brown, A.K. Burns, Vija Celmins, Anne Collier, Claudia Comte, Anne-Lise Coste, Jessica Craig-Martin, Ann Craven, Sonia Louise Davis, Jeremy Deller, Liz Deschenes, Steve DiBenedetto, Sam Durant, Gardar Eide Einarsson, Rachel Feinstein, David Flaugher, Ryan Förster, Jason Fox, Adam Fuss, Rico Gaston, Cy Gavin, Robert Gober, Dan Graham, Paul Graham, Heather Guertin, Anthea Hamilton, Lyle Ashton Harris, Jim Hodges, Juliana Huxtable, Steffani Jamison, Jasper Johns, Jennie C. Jones, Wyatt Kahn, Valerie Keane, Nicholas Kokkinis, Marc Kokopelli, Adam Krueger, Sadie Laska, Louise Lawler, Margaret Lee, Julian Lethbridge, Hanna Liden, Klara Liden, Glenn Ligon, Robert Longo, Andrew Lord, Nate Lowman, Sarah Lucas, Eric N. Mack, Ari Marcopoulos, Megan Marrin, Justin Matherly, Marlene McCarty, Adam McEwen, Bjarne Melgaard, Wardell Milan, Robert Morris, Sam Moyer, Matt Mullican, Clive Murphy, Kayode Ojo, Mai-Thu Perret, Elizabeth Peyton, Valerie Piraino, Pope.L, Seth Price, Stephen Prina, David Salle, Dana Schutz, Bailey Scieszka, Paul Magie Sepuya, Heji Shin and Bernadette Van-Huy, Erin Shirreff, Amy Sillman, Xaviera Simmons, Agathe Snow, Sarah Staton, Rudolf Stingel, Emily Sundblad, Philip Taaffe, Cynthia Talmadge, Pádraig Timoney, Virginia Inés Vergara, Banks Violette, Marianne Vitale, Charline von Heyl, Dan Walsh, James Welling, T.J. Wilcox, Terry Winters, Aaron Young.

We are pleased to present an exhibition of paintings and works on paper by Keith Haring, all created between 1987 and 1989. These exquisite and surprising compositions, some of which are being exhibited for the first time, capture Haring's invented version of reality that defined his artistic career. Astutely employing popular culture, sexual imagery, and religious iconography, the collages and large-scale paintings on view offer a deeply personal and critically important narrative, while simultaneously providing rare examples of works created during the last years of Haring's life. ​Haring first rose to prominence in New York for his spontaneous, graffiti-inspired drawings that began throughout the city's subway stations during the early 1980s. The artist's motive for the subway drawings was not self-promotion or property defacement, but rather his passion for democratic accessibility to his work outside of conventional art spaces. Though many of his creations appeared celebratory and playful, he was a politically active and socially conscious artist, interested in reflecting and responding to the cultural climate in which he was living. As a result, Haring's works frequently explore complex themes of sexuality, religion, racial inequality, economics, technology, and the AIDS virus. Haring's canvas, Malcolm X (1988), visually summarizes these overarching themes, with the careful inclusion of imagery and motifs inherent to the artist's practice. This late work, a commentary on discrimination against African-Americans, reinterprets Haring's familiar iconography while interjecting elements of popular culture, art history, and religion in a collage-like manner, and articulate his urgency to visually narrate injustices throughout history using various methods of creation. During the last years of his life, Haring continued to experiment with collage in both his paintings and drawings, a practice he had explored in his early career. These works were created on flat surfaces and include delicately rendered figures and symbols made with gouache and ink. Embedded in each work are different pieces of ephemera, such as magazine covers, newspaper clippings, reproductions of famous paintings like Leonardo da Vinci's Mona Lisa, and homoerotic advertisements, gathered contemporaneously with each work's creation, that weave their way into these post-apocalyptic and ambiguous landscapes. Much like the free-flowing way in which Haring conceived of his earliest public drawings, often depicting his subjects with one continuous line, these collages mimic the artist's automatic approach to artmaking and incorporate cerebral and investigative elements of artistic production. These collages, like Haring's late paintings, bridge dissimilar subjects from contemporary culture and history, providing new dialogues surrounding important social issues during his lifetime that still resonate today. On these collages, art historian Alexandra Anderson-Spivy notes, "His urge to experiment, while ever present, intensified as he came to acknowledge his time as limited. He seems to have felt unremitting pressure to explore new kinds of gesture, new mediums." These visual experiments, some of Haring's last works, demonstrate his never-ending curiosity with various media, as well as his career-long interest in artwork accessibility as means to enact social change. ​​As 2018 marks what would have been Haring's sixtieth year of life, this exhibition serves as a memorial to and celebration of his artistic career and profound impact on society through his support of marginalized youth, and individuals fighting AIDS, which continues today through the efforts of the Keith Haring Foundation. Keith Haring was born on May 4, 1958 in Reading, Pennsylvania and died at the age of thirty-one of AIDS-related illnesses in New York City. Since his death, his work has been the subject of major solo exhibitions around the world, most recently at the Albertina Museum, Vienna. From 2013 through 2015, Haring was the subject of an international touring exhibition, "Keith Haring: The Political Line," which traveled to the Musée d'Art Moderne de la Ville de Paris; the de Young Museum, San Francisco; and the Kunsthalle der Hypo- Kulturstiftung, Munich. In 1994, the Castello di Rivoli premiered Haring's first major institutional solo exhibition. In 2012, "Keith Haring: 1978-1982", co-organized in 2010 by the Contemporary Arts Center, Cincinnati and the Kunsthalle Wien, Vienna, traveled to the Brooklyn Museum of Art. Haring's work is in major private and public collections, including The Museum of Modern Art, New York; The Whitney Museum of American Art, New York; Los Angeles County Museum of Art, Los Angeles; The Art Institute of Chicago, Chicago; The Bass Museum, Miami; Centre Georges Pompidou, Paris; Ludwig Museum, Cologne; and Stedelijk Museum, Amsterdam.

We are pleased to present an exhibition of new paintings by Victor Man, inspired by the first and second of Rainer Maria Rilke's Duino Elegies. The obscurity in which Victor Man's images live is thus not just the condition that allows light to progressively appear. In fact, this obscurity is also the transitional space in which the artist is able to abandon the modernist paradigm according to which painting consists of autonomy and the picture is a place where support and language explore only their own limits and possibilities, with no intention to resemble reality. Instead, this obscurity in which Man's paintings are immersed, is a place of extreme osmosis, where images and abstractions cohabit, in which the everyday and the fantastic blend together, and the autobiographical experience of the artist communicates with art history, while the feminine and masculine, the human and the animal intermingle. Here, darkness is the condition that enables the coexistence of multiple transitions between meaning and identity, a condition that allows us to contemplate the human existence in all its complexity and its continuous mutation: what appears humble can become sacred, while a gesture of tenderness can hurt; the monstrous can prove to be miraculous and the commonplace can free all its potential mystery. This dynamism of things and appearances originates precisely in that form of vision that might be defined as "partial" and that characterizes Victor Man's painting. It is a kind of withholding that takes a long time to open up and calls forth a time that is equally distant. There is an archaic quality to Victor Man's painting that is not limited to the nearly total absence of references to contemporariness, but absorbs in a more radical manner a sentiment and desire for our time.1 —Alessandro Rabottini Victor Man was born in 1974 and lives in Rome and Cluj, Romania. He has been the subject of a number of solo exhibitions at museums worldwide including, most recently: Museo Tamayo, Mexico City; Haus der Kunst, Munich; National Gallery of Art, Warsaw; Villa Medici, Rome. Man has also been included in a number of group exhibitions including: "These Strangers…Painting and People," S.M.A.K., Ghent, BE; The New Frontiers of Painting, Fondazione Stelline, Milan; Thinking Out Loud: Notes For An Evolving Collection, The Warehouse, Dallas; the 56th Biennale di Venezia; "Six Lines of Flight: Shifting Geographies in Contemporary Art," San Francisco Museum of Modern Art, San Francisco; La Triennale, "Intense Proximity," Palais de Tokyo, Paris; "Tanzimat," Augarten Contemporary, Belvedere Museum, Vienna, Austria; "Foreigners Everywhere," Jewish Museum, Vienna; "Whose (His)story," Kunstverein, Hamburg, Germany; "Back to Black," Kestner Gesellschaft, Hannover, Germany. 1Alessandro Rabottini, "Icarus with No Sun," Victor Man: Szindbád. Published by Hatje Cantz, 2014.

We are pleased to present an exhibition of works by Austrian artist Birgit Jürgenssen, featuring drawings and sculptures from the 1970s and 80s. Her practice explores the representation of women's psychic lives as refracted by the dominant systems of labor and commodity. These works illustrate not only the facility with which Jürgenssen engaged with various media, but also exemplify her rigorous commitment to conflating Structuralism and feminist critique with the visual markers of Surrealism. Either as the direct subject in autobiographical self-portraits or the engaged chronicler of both the fantastic and the everyday, Jürgenssen questions accepted constructions of gender through depictions of the female body, sex, and the art historical canon that are both playfully humorous and bitingly critical. Jürgenssen emerged during the fecund Viennese art scene of the early 1970s and soon began presenting work that would come to typify the major conceptual concerns of her oeuvre. Many of her drawings examine the ubiquitous presence of the culturally imagined "hausfrau"—the bourgeois woman whose life was circumscribed by domestic labor and consumerism. Jürgenssen investigated the function of power within quotidian life by estranging the commonplace with images drawn from biology and zoology. Her acuity as a draughts-person and embrace of Surrealism situate these images somewhere between satire and fairytale. Her drawings often imply female imperilment, but rather than simply suggesting threats of physical danger, the artist instead opts to represent an escape from the suffocating burden of culturally instituted gender expectations through the possibility of fantastical transformation. A woman's transparent dress becomes the armor defending her own private psychic terrain; a figure in restrictive period costume disappears into a frame escaping the world through the looking glass; chairs and knives becomes tools not of restriction but of connection to primal animalistic strength. Jürgenssen's sculpture—such as her renowned shoe works—extend surreal images across various media to create searing appraisals of gender codes and their oppressive impact on female agency and identity. Using the heel as a classic metonym for oppression, Jürgenssen used a variety of materials, including cow's tongue, reptile bones, flies, or feathers, to create a series of sculptures that lay bare the sexualization and instability that attend all performances of femininity. Other works, such as Listen to Someone—a ceramic pillow on which miniature hammer, anvil, and stirrup lay—play with the intersection of the senses and how we incorporate inanimate objects to conceptualize understanding our world. Birgit Jürgenssen was born in 1949 in Vienna where she lived and worked for most of her life until she died in 2003. She is the subject of a solo exhibition I am that opens in November 2018 at Kunsthalle Tübingen, Germany, before traveling to GAMeC, Bergamo, Italy and LOUISIANA Museum of Modern Art, Humlebæk, Denmark. Jürgenssen's work has been the subject of major solo exhibitions at institutions including: Kunstforum, Vienna; MAK, Vienna; Sammlung Verbund, Vienna. Her work has been included in group exhibitions at Museum of Modern Art, New York; Le Monnaie de Paris; Tate St. Ives, England; Museum of Fine Arts, Houston; Gwangju Biennale 2014, China; Centre Pompidou, Paris; Museum für Moderne Kunst, Frankfurt, Germany.

We are pleased to present an exhibition of three distinct yet interrelated bodies of work by Ugo Rondinone in both Chelsea locations. Developed throughout his practice, these large-scale landscape drawings, window, and sun sculptures speak directly to Rondinone's continued exploration of German Romanticism and its key artistic figure, Caspar David Friedrich. Reanimating commonplace objects—such as tree branches or window frames—in his own Neo-Romantic signature, he creates a lyrical world of his own. This formal and generic diversity mines the fecund aesthetic and philosophical tensions central to his work: nature and humanity, exterior world and inner life, expansion and intimacy, organic and artificial. Rondinone stylizes these dichotomies into new physical and temporal sites of self-reflection and universal connection. Rondinone's sepia drawings of wooded landscapes have been foundational to his oeuvre since 1989. Reminiscent of the drawings of Romantic landscape painters Rodolphe Bresdin and Samuel Palmer, the haptic idiosyncrasies of Rondinone's hatching gestures manifest in absorbing tableau of knotted trees, twisting branches, and overabundant foliage. In this way, they extend the tradition of the wanderzeichner or wandering draughtsman—a sylvan progenitor to the urban flaneur—into the present day. Exchanging plein air realism for imaginative fiction, these large-scale drawings come from an archive of the artist's own naturalist sketches of individual flora; they are then patchworked together into a world of Rondinone's creation. Seducing the viewer into darkness, these drawings recall nature's central role in the Romantic conception of the sublime. In his Theories of Garden Art (1775/77), noted German philosopher and landscape designer C.C.L. Hirschfeld presaged the soul expanding properties of such expansive and dramatic vistas: Rondinone's beguiling landscapes, too, inspire one to feel that one "no longer belongs to the everyday, but instead is a being of power and determination manifesting far beyond the point at which we stand." Gladstone's 21st street location will feature a monumental sun sculpture, a single ring of gilded bronze, cast from encircling tree branches. Blunt ends of the individual tree trunks and the punctae of twigs bind the sun to the ground, even as it seems to hang in the air. Evoking the celestial body using antecedents of the earth, Rondinone's sun celebrates the lyrical paradoxes that contour ontological boundaries and how they eventually collapse via the aesthetic gesture's potential to transform. Both spaces include examples of his series of window sculptures—metal casts of nineteenth-century window casings each named for one of Friedrich's paintings, including drifting clouds, where this exhibition takes its name. Defying the expectation of revealing a "heavenly panorama" of the kind writer Kurt Waller noted he saw in the views from Friedrich's studio, the burnished opacity of these window panes marks a key distinction in Rondinone's practice. For him, the shift between complete absorption in the natural world's sublimity to the solitude of self-reflection hearkens to dramatic tensions that distinguish the Romantic mode, while also recalling nineteenth century critic Walter Pater's evocation of sensual experience as ultimately "the impression of the individual in his isolation, each mind keeping as a solitary prisoner its own dream of a world." Ugo Rondinone was born in 1964 in Brunnen, Switzerland and currently lives and works in New York. Rondinone has been the subject of recent solo exhibitions at institutions including: Bass Museum of Art, Miami; Berkeley Art Museum and Pacific Film Archive, Berkeley; Contemporary Arts Center, Cincinnati; Garage Museum of Contemporary Art, Moscow; Place Vendôme, Paris; MACRO and Mercati di Traiano, Rome; The Institute of Contemporary Art, Boston; Museum Boijmans van Beuningen, Rotterdam; Museum Anahuacalli, Mexico City; Rockbund Art Museum, Shanghai; Museum of Cycladic Art, Athens; Kunsthistorisches Museum Wien, Vienna; and Museum Dhondt-Dhaenens, Deurle, Belgium. In 2016, Rondinone's large-scale public work seven magic mountains opened outside Las Vegas, co-produced by the Art Production Fund and Nevada Museum of Art. Last year, Rondinone curated a city-wide exhibition, "Ugo Rondinone: I ♥ John Giorno," which honored the artist's life partner in thirteen venues throughout Manhattan. His work is currently on view at the Arken Museum of Modern Art in Ishøj, Denmark through the end of the year.

We are pleased to present an exhibition of three distinct yet interrelated bodies of work by Ugo Rondinone in both Chelsea locations. Developed throughout his practice, these large-scale landscape drawings, window, and sun sculptures speak directly to Rondinone's continued exploration of German Romanticism and its key artistic figure, Caspar David Friedrich. Reanimating commonplace objects—such as tree branches or window frames—in his own Neo-Romantic signature, he creates a lyrical world of his own. This formal and generic diversity mines the fecund aesthetic and philosophical tensions central to his work: nature and humanity, exterior world and inner life, expansion and intimacy, organic and artificial. Rondinone stylizes these dichotomies into new physical and temporal sites of self-reflection and universal connection. Rondinone's sepia drawings of wooded landscapes have been foundational to his oeuvre since 1989. Reminiscent of the drawings of Romantic landscape painters Rodolphe Bresdin and Samuel Palmer, the haptic idiosyncrasies of Rondinone's hatching gestures manifest in absorbing tableau of knotted trees, twisting branches, and overabundant foliage. In this way, they extend the tradition of the wanderzeichneror wandering draughtsman—a sylvan progenitor to the urban flaneur—into the present day. Exchanging plein air realism for imaginative fiction, these large-scale drawings come from an archive of the artist's own naturalist sketches of individual flora; they are then patchworked together into a world of Rondinone's creation. Seducing the viewer into darkness, these drawings recall nature's central role in the Romantic conception of the sublime. In his Theories of Garden Art (1775/77), noted German philosopher and landscape designer C.C.L. Hirschfeld presaged the soul expanding properties of such expansive and dramatic vistas: Rondinone's beguiling landscapes, too, inspire one to feel that one "no longer belongs to the everyday, but instead is a being of power and determination manifesting far beyond the point at which we stand." Gladstone's 21st street location will feature a monumental sun sculpture, a single ring of gilded bronze, cast from encircling tree branches. Blunt ends of the individual tree trunks and the punctae of twigs bind the sun to the ground, even as it seems to hang in the air. Evoking the celestial body using antecedents of the earth, Rondinone's sun celebrates the lyrical paradoxes that contour ontological boundaries and how they eventually collapse via the aesthetic gesture's potential to transform. Both spaces include examples of his series of window sculptures—metal casts of nineteenth-century window casings each named for one of Friedrich's paintings, including drifting clouds, where this exhibition takes its name. Defying the expectation of revealing a "heavenly panorama" of the kind writer Kurt Waller noted he saw in the views from Friedrich's studio, the burnished opacity of these window panes marks a key distinction in Rondinone's practice. For him, the shift between complete absorption in the natural world's sublimity to the solitude of self-reflection hearkens to dramatic tensions that distinguish the Romantic mode, while also recalling nineteenth century critic Walter Pater's evocation of sensual experience as ultimately "the impression of the individual in his isolation, each mind keeping as a solitary prisoner its own dream of a world." Ugo Rondinone was born in 1964 in Brunnen, Switzerland and currently lives and works in New York. Rondinone has been the subject of recent solo exhibitions at institutions including: Bass Museum of Art, Miami; Berkeley Art Museum and Pacific Film Archive, Berkeley; Contemporary Arts Center, Cincinnati; Garage Museum of Contemporary Art, Moscow; Place Vendôme, Paris; MACRO and Mercati di Traiano, Rome; The Institute of Contemporary Art, Boston; Museum Boijmans van Beuningen, Rotterdam; Museum Anahuacalli, Mexico City; Rockbund Art Museum, Shanghai; Museum of Cycladic Art, Athens; Kunsthistorisches Museum Wien, Vienna; and Museum Dhondt-Dhaenens, Deurle, Belgium. In 2016, Rondinone's large-scale public work seven magic mountains opened outside Las Vegas, co-produced by the Art Production Fund and Nevada Museum of Art. Last year, Rondinone curated a city-wide exhibition, "Ugo Rondinone: I ♥ John Giorno," which honored the artist's life partner in thirteen venues throughout Manhattan. His work is currently on view at the Arken Museum of Modern Art in Ishøj, Denmark through the end of the year.

Gladstone 64 is pleased to announce an exhibition of new works by Banks Violette. The artist, known for conjoining the materials and forms of Minimal and Conceptual Art with signifiers of sub-cultural communities, presents a new sculpture and a body of works on paper. Violette's first solo presentation in New York in nearly a decade demonstrates his continued exploration of the residues left by social rupture when venerated canonical imagery is sacrificed for the sake of the new. For this exhibition, Violette presents a group of new drawings that examine the self-cannibalizing tendencies of contemporary America's collective hunger to witness the rise and fall of public figures. Employing the iconography of scandals both public and private, the logo from Roseanne and a sympathetic portrait of Stormy Daniels index the fluctuating distance between the person and the persona. Seeing the exsanguination of identity and the subsequent devastation of authenticity as a metaphor for art's impulse to replicate existing figures and forms, Violette addresses the losses inherent in all instances of facsimile. He asserts that the copy nonetheless carries the historical burden of the original and that all duplicates are permanently bound to their referents despite cultural amnesia. A graphically simple linear abstraction initially presents itself as an exercise in the syntax of Minimalism, yet gains additional emotional heft as a digital trace left on the artist's computer by an assistant who subsequently committed suicide. Utilizing imagery that references the facility with which we reassign meaning, Violette channels the overwhelming desire for the loss of the real and the continual production of myth. Further evincing the artist's handling of "the copy" is a sculptural recreation of Peter Saville's cover for New Order's 1983 album, Power Corruption and Lies, itself a repurposing of Henri Fantin-Latour's 1890 painting, Roses in a Basket. An appropriation of an appropriation, Violette's iteration is composed of a basket cast via the lost-wax method and a living replica of the floral arrangement depicted in the still life. Rather than aiming for a three-dimensional transposition of a two-dimensional canvas, though, the artist instead revels in the ersatz quality of his replica, a gesture made explicit in the decision to include only white flowers. Thwarting the viewer's desire to encounter the object as a manifestation of the painting's original subject, Violette instead presents it to us as a post-mortem artifact, a signifier so bloated with oscillating connotation that it wilts under the weight of its own history. Banks Violette was born in 1973 and lives and works in Ithaca, New York. He received his B.F.A. from the School of Visual Arts, New York and his M.F.A. from Columbia University, New York. His work has been the subject of numerous solo exhibitions, including those at Museum Dhont-Dhaenens in Deurle, Belgium; Kunsthalle Wien; the Modern Art Museum of Fort Worth, Texas; Kunsthalle Bergen, Norway; and the Whitney Museum of American Art. He has also participated in group exhibitions at The Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, New York; the Migros Museum für Gegenwartskunst, Zürich; Museum of Modern Art, New York; Palais de Tokyo, Paris; the Royal Academy, London; MoMA P.S. 1, New York; the Museum Boijmans van Beuningen, Rotterdam; among others.

Gladstone Gallery Brussels is pleased to present Movements and Variations in Two Parts, an exhibition of new works by Sharon Lockhart spanning two neighboring locations: Gladstone Gallery and Jan Mot. The exhibition features a series of photographic and sculptural works that stem from Lockhart's ongoing interest in portraiture, choreography, and the empowerment of women. Lockhart's longstanding investment in place is evident both in the work presented and in the installation. The artist has spent years visiting the Sierra Nevada Mountains, often returning with manzanita, buckeye, and black walnut sticks which she presented as gifts to friends. These physical traces of the landscape gained symbolic form in her relationship with the girls of Rudzienko, with whom Lockhart collaborated for her presentation Little Review in the Polish Pavilion at the 57th Biennale di Venezia. Through the sticks, Lockhart could share a part of her home with the girls and they became a unifying force for the group. For Movements and Variations Lockhart has cast a selection of the sticks in bronze. The exhibition presents them in two forms: a series of bronze sculptures and nine photographic portraits. This doubling is further complicated by the installation's fracture into two exhibition spaces. Arranged in collaboration with Ravi GuneWardena from the Sogetsu School of Ikebana, the bronze sticks balance form and weight in six different arrangements. The series A Bundle and Five Variations (2018) features an inherent property of casting, the ability to multiply and play. Lockhart and GuneWardena took their initial bundle of nine sticks and derived five variations with successively fewer elements. Together, the sculptural iterations reflect both the natural and constructed relationships of the sticks. Lockhart's corresponding photographic works, Nine Sticks in Nine Movements (2018), feature a female protagonist, Sichong Xie, performing a set number of precisely choreographed poses with each of the nine bronze sticks, whose weight and form appear to dictate the subject's actions. The photographs capture the exchange between choreography and the physicality of the bronzes, as the branches are employed as balancing tools for Xie, who physically connects to the objects with strength, focus, and poise. Each position, or movement, is methodically planned with reference to a myriad of stances borrowed from social and art historical sources. Like much of Lockhart's work, the simple and cleanly composed elements that constitute this exhibition belie a rich humanism and complex web of narratives and associations. Themes of collaboration, nature, labor, play, feminism, and agency echo amongst the elegant forms and architecture of the two galleries, prompting viewers to meditate on the role of aesthetic experience in their lives. Bringing beauty into the world is both healing and inspirational, a lesson Lockhart has brought to our attention in the last several years of work with the young women of Rudzienko. The works in this exhibition were commissioned and produced by Fondazione Modena Arti Visive in 2018. Sharon Lockhart (born 1964) lives and works in Los Angeles. Lockhart's work has been the subject of numerous solo exhibitions at international institutions including Fonzadione Fotografia Modena, Italy; the Museu Colecção Berardo, Lisbon; Arts Club of Chicago; Rose Art Museum at Brandeis University, Waltham; Wiener Secession, Austria; Walker Art Center, Minneapolis; Fogg Art Museum at Harvard University, Cambridge; Museum Boijmans Van Beuningen, Rotterdam; Kunsthalle Zürich, Switzerland; Museum of Contemporary Art, Chicago; Wolfsburg Museum, Germany; San Francisco Museum of Modern Art; and Los Angeles County Museum of Art. Her films have been included in the New York Film Festival, Vienna International Film Festival, Berlin Film Festival, and the Sundance Film Festival. In 2017, Lockhart represented Poland at the 57th Venice Biennale with her multidisciplinary project, Little Review, organized with National Gallery of Art in Warsaw, Poland, and more recently, presented a selection of works from the Venice Biennale at FRONT International: Cleveland Triennial for Contemporary Art, Cleveland, Ohio.

We are pleased to present Voice of America a group exhibition anchored by Vito Acconci's iconic installation of the same name. This exhibition expands on the work's themes via responses by Paul Chan, Sharon Hayes, Barbara Kruger, and Rirkrit Tiravanija, each of whose practices engage in various formal and conceptual dialogue with the installation. Originally mounted at the Portland Center for Contemporary Arts in 1975, Voice of America incorporates sculpture, projected images, and sound to transform architectural space into a site of social critique. Two monumental wooden chairs sit in a darkened gallery, whose floor is latticed with rope. Images of the American landscape are projected across the floor while Acconci's own lyrical rumination on our nation plays. As Acconci describes it, "One kind of American music drifts into another: America presented in a music lesson, a geography lesson: from Ozark fiddle to California harmonica to New Orleans piano… My voice is the voice of a mythical Mr. America talking to Mrs. America: we're giving voice to an American dream... There is a voice calling out from the wilderness, jabs of voice…here's the response from the children of America." Through the artist's signature poetic satire, Acconci deconstructs the national myths of manifest destiny and the promise of boundless opportunity. Tackling American institutions and identities latent in the installation, Chan, Hayes, Kruger, and Tiravanija raise questions as to the political, economic, and social framework of the nation. Each exposes harsh truths of our American reality, including inequality, consumerism, our leadership, and oppression of marginalized groups. While celebrating the singular and influential legacy of Vito Acconci, this group exhibition includes other voices of the American experience at this precarious time when our founding ideals are in-flux and threatened. Vito Acconci (1940-2017) was a pioneering artist, poet, and architect. The legacy of his influential conceptual work is still felt in the fields of performance, social practice, installation, and multimedia art. He has been the subject of numerous one-person exhibitions, including those at the Museum of Modern Art; the Museum of Contemporary Art, Chicago, and the Whitney Museum of American Art. Paul Chan is an artist, writer, and publisher of Badlands Unlimited. His animated films, performances and multimedia work centering on Western philosophers and outsider artists question the hierarchies of knowledge. Sharon Hayes has used performance, video, and photography to grapple with the intimacy of activism and social justice. For this exhibition she returns to her seminal work The Lesbian to question unconscious gender bias implicit in our understanding of the environment and national identity. Barbara Kruger's graphic photo and text works challenge the myths of power implicit in image and language. Since the 1970s, she has exposed bitter truths of gender, politics, and inequality through her signature graphic style and pithy insight. Rirkrit Tiravanija explores the social dynamics that define how people come together. Through both architectural and performative interventions, he breaks down the distinctions imposed by space to create moments of sharing and communal knowledge production.

Let's try and make a story Mean velocity of wind on a height of 10 m above flat terrain m/sec: 0-3 Mean velocity of wind on a height of 10 m above flat terrain km/h: 1-11 Designation: Light air Indication: Direction of wind easily identifiable from puffs of smoke, wind becomes perceptible in the face; leaves begin to rustle and weather-vanes may start to move. This description of so-called "Light air" derives from the Beaufort Scale, which was appropriated by Marinus Boezem (1934) in 1968. After the wind has been symbolized by numbers, a designation follows. It's only after this denomination that the type of wind is visualized. The awareness of the fact everything in the world has its own 'logo' has been of great importance for Boezem's thinking. Creating logos in an attempt to grasp phenomena we think we understand helps us to navigate the world. The outcome may sound or look childish or naive, but isn't it this kind of play we need to make our own stories? The artists in this exhibition have been brought together by Kasper Bosmans who recognized a shared conceptual and visual sensitivity in their work that relates to events that matter in our everyday life. The title of the show derives from an untitled and undated work by Jack Smith (1932-1989), which reads: "My voice is low the hum comes from the stumuch. The effortless tones seem to come out sounding best. Don't be afraid to be nasal - the nostrils to be relaxed & able to breathe have to be a bit nasal." Jean Katambayi Mukendi (1974) maps his surroundings in works that are reminiscent of technical drawings, world maps, and other topologies, playfully pointing to defects in society and the mysteries of being. Sara Sejin Chang (Sara van der Heide) (1977) negotiates biased views on histories and societies by offering propositions that reimagine and re-appropriate methods, historical and political happenings and sites, thus resulting in poetic and intimate gestures. On the other hand, Jack Smith's scribbles evoke absurd, perverse, attractive, and sensual dream worlds that are completely separate from any existing structure. They are worlds we could only long for although they might be repulsive at the same time. On the other hand, Jack Smith's scribbles evoke absurd, perverse, attractive, and sensual dream worlds that are completely separate from any existing structure. They are worlds we could only long for although they might be repulsive at the same time. The work of Trevor Yeung (1988) evokes a feeling of longing as well, however much more intimate and less expressive. By scanning environments and people, often from a distance, Yeung is trying to uncover all kinds of relationships between them, especially the influence of nature on one's domestic environment. Marthe Ramm Fortun (1978) is also exploring environments, often performing site specific texts using body, language and elusive sculptural boundaries to inscribe closed off institutional spaces and urban landscapes with persistent and poetic feminisms. Whereas one searches for meanings within existing structures, the other tries to create a new individual one, while yet another is trying to question the existing structures, to mess up or even to ridicule and transgress them. They are all making stories. In collaboration with Bosmans, this text was written by Art Historian Julia Mullié.

"Of weary days, made deeper exquisite, By a fore-knowledge of unslumbrous night!" - "Endymion," John Keats Gladstone 64 is pleased to present an exhibition of a new series of cast bronze sculptures by Andrew Lord. The works on view were most recently exhibited as part of the artist's solo installation on the Bluhm Family Terrace at the Art Institute of Chicago. On unslumbrous night, Lord notes: This body of work began with an ending, when I left a studio of many years on the Bowery and went to Paris looking for something unknown, because Paris is where I have the clearest memory of finding something unknown in the 1970s. A mural in the Petit Palais, The Hours of the Day and the Night by Paul Baudouin, seemed to describe my search without a clear aim, spent assembling images that described the finality of time and the fragility of the human condition. Instead of the unknown, in Paris I re-discovered what I'd found there once before; Corot, Monet and Picasso. In particular two paintings by Picasso overwhelmed me: Death of Casagemas and Large Nude in a Red Armchair. Later, working in New Mexico, trying to make sense of these images, I added what surrounded me there; the night sky, a new moon, a candle and the constellations and I renamed these works 'unslumbrous night', which I took from Keats' "Endymion" because it seemed to describe the sleepless nights and racing thoughts of giving shape and form to these ideas. One night I awoke to a glowing television screen and the Jack Benny Program to see an astonishing juggler who I discovered to be Francis Brunn. These works are the sum of all these parts: Death of Casagemas, Large Nude in a Red Armchair, the new moon, a candle, the constellations and the German juggler, Francis Brunn. In conjunction with this exhibition, five of these bronze works will be part of a special two-person presentation featuring Andrew Lord and Amy Sillman at Gladstone Gallery's booth at TEFAF New York, May 4-8, 2018. Andrew Lord was born in 1950 in Rochdale, England and works in Europe and New York. His work has been the subject of numerous solo exhibitions at international institutions, including: Art Institute of Chicago, Illinois; Milton Keynes Gallery, Milton Keynes, England; Santa Monica Museum of Art, California; Rijksmuseum Twenthe, Enschede, Netherlands; Camden Arts Centre, London; and The Carnegie Museum of Art, Pittsburgh. The artist's work is held in many public collections, including: The Hammer Museum, Los Angeles; Kröller-Müller Museum, Otterlo, The Netherlands; Los Angeles County Museum of Art; Museum Boijmans van Beuningen, Rotterdam; Museum of Contemporary Art, Los Angeles; Museum of Modern Art, New York; Philip Johnson's Glass House, New Canaan, Connecticut; Stedelijk Museum, Amsterdam; Tate Britain, London; Victoria and Albert Museum, London, among many others. In 2014, Lord was resident at Cité International des Arts Paris. unslumbrous night was created with funds from the Prince Prize for Commissioning Original Work, which was awarded to Andrew Lord and the Art Institute of Chicago in 2017.

We are pleased to present an exhibition by Huang Yong Ping, the artist's fifth exhibition with the gallery. This show presents Bank of Sand, Sand of Bank, an important historical work by Huang for the first time in New York since its creation nearly two decades ago. Bank of Sand, Sand of Bank derives its structure from the former HSBC Bank in Shanghai, built in 1923 by the British architecture firm Palmer & Turner. During the Chinese Revolution of 1949, this Neoclassical landmark was transformed into the Communist Municipal People's Government Building, and later became the headquarters for the Pudong Development Bank in the 1990s. Huang's 20-ton replica of this edifice, comprised of sand and concrete, contemplates the troubling history this building has lived through while questioning the power of ruling institutions. Through the use of unstable materials, this building, which is meant to stand for security and power, is transformed into a vulnerable and forgotten ruin that appears as though it could collapse at a moment's notice. The work's fragility and temporality visualizes the turbulent past and exchanges of power this monument has witnessed over time, while also providing a deeper narrative surrounding the longevity and effectiveness of governing bodies throughout history. Originally shown in 2000 at the Shanghai Biennale, this work connects to the artist's interest in reproducing and recontexualizing significant monuments throughout history, infused with visual clues that address themes such as colonialism and cultural reappropriation. Bank of Sand, Sand of Bank is a particularly significant example of this impulse for the artist, who has also revisited sites such as the Colosseum, the Pentagon and Osama bin Laden's compound in Abbottaban, Pakistan. In this instance, the building's original structure adopts a Neoclassicist design and was originally intended as the Chinese headquarters for a bank founded in British-ruled Hong Kong in the late 19th-century by a British architecture firm. Huang highlights the structure's complicated origins, both physical and conceptual, filled with an amalgam of blatant seizures of cultural property and ideological notions. Huang Yong Ping was born in 1954 in Xiamen, China, and currently lives and works in Paris, France. He participated in the seminal exhibition "Magiciens de la Terre" at Centre Georges Pompidou, Paris in 1989, and represented France at the 1999 Venice Biennale. In 2006, the Walker Art Center in Minneapolis organized and premiered his retrospective "House of Oracles," which traveled to Mass MoCA in North Adams, Massachusetts, Vancouver Art Gallery, and Ullens Center, Beijing. Other solo exhibitions include: CCA Kitakyushu, Japan; De Appel, Amsterdam; Fondation Cartier pour l'Art Contemporain, Paris; Atelier d'Artistes de la Ville de Marseille; Astrup Fearnley Museum, Oslo; Barbican Art Gallery, London; and New Museum of Contemporary Art, New York. Recently, Huang was featured in the Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum exhibition, "Theater of the World: Art in China after 1989," and is currently included in "What Absence Is Made Of" at The Smithsonian's Hirshhorn Museum and Sculpture Garden, on view through summer 2019. This year, Huang will be included in the Bangkok Art Biennale from October 19, 2018, to February 3, 2019.

We are pleased to present an exhibition of new works by Carroll Dunham. This show features large-scale paintings from the artist's Wrestlers series, which demonstrate Dunham's continued exploration of and fascination with interpretations of the nude body with particular attention to the male form. Made over the last year, these paintings reflect a clear new direction for the artist through the lens of the distinctive approach to painting that Dunham has employed and tinkered with throughout his career. Using the visual language of mythological depictions of wrestling, mined from art historical sources and his own memory, these paintings propose new through lines in Dunham's practice that are both formal and autobiographical in nature. Providing male counterparts to the female figures Dunham has continuously returned to, the wrestlers introduce a variety of visceral and psychological narratives that incorporate an amalgam of recurring themes prevalent throughout his oeuvre, namely playfulness, violence, and sexuality. Set in vibrant and abstracted landscapes adorned with trees, flowers, birds, and dogs, the male protagonists brutally assault one another, gently hold each other, or lie lifeless on the rugged terrain. Each composition provides a unique insight into the physical and mental struggles among these competing figures, either through straightforward scenes of men attacking each other, or through the documentation of defeated men left for dead. This psychology is intensified through the formal framing of the men within the rectangular bounds of the canvas, as well as through the repeated insertion of jet black birds that witness the violent matches and aftermath of each battle, predatorily looming over the turbulent scenes. Though the wrestler paintings present a new approach to less explored motifs, these works reuse and play with a visual vocabulary found throughout Dunham's paintings and drawings. For instance, in Any Day (2017), the viewer is transported to an unidentifiable technicolor terrain of rolling hills where scale, gravity and reality are rendered incongruous, a signature setting for the artist. The composition is split in half by an S-shaped outline of grass-covered hills filled with cartoonish florae. Beyond this verdant topography, Dunham depicts a nude woman bathing, an important recurring character in his earlier figurative works. By combining this array of familiar figures and settings with his newfound male protagonists, Dunham's recent works demonstrate his ever-explorative vision and curiosity in depicting forms in space. A forthcoming catalogue with an essay by Catherine Taft will accompany the exhibition. Carroll Dunham was born in 1949 and lives and works in New York and Connecticut. Dunham's work has been the subject of numerous solo exhibitions at international institutions including Museum Ludwig, Cologne; Millesgården, Stockholm; Drammens Museum, Drammen, Norway; a mid-career retrospective was held at the New Museum of Contemporary Art, New York. Dunham has also been included in notable group exhibitions including multiple Whitney Biennials and SITE Santa Fe; and at institutions including Musée d'art moderne et contemporain, Geneva; the Museum of Modern Art, New York; Museu Picasso, Barcelona; The Institute of Contemporary Art, Boston.

We are pleased to present its fourth exhibition by artist Roe Ethridge, whose photographs deconstruct visual syntax by consciously reworking tropes of both stock imagery and fine art. These new works serve as an extended meditation on genres and styles associated with the traditions of Dutch painting, particularly the still life, domestic scene, and portraiture. Ethridge reflects on these models as foundational to "visual culture" in exposing the image as a material construction that simultaneously produces and is produced by complex relationships: artist and subject, nature and technology, and the personal and the social. Through this lens, he connects disparate figures, including mushroom spores, holiday tchotchkes, and fashion models, via subtle formal cues-such as color, reoccurring motif, or compositional correspondence-that denaturalize the photograph's claims to objectivity. In these slyly complex images, Ethridge utilizes a hybrid of digital and analogue techniques to denude signification from its source and resituate assumed relations within an uncanny valley somewhere between art history and contemporary meme culture. Indexing the fugal reiterations of production and transmission, Ethridge constructs his images around mass-produced objects and mediated layers of imagery to reveal his own ambivalent stance on photography's authenticity. In this way, he reframes the generic customs of the Dutch masters for the age of the camera-phone, critiquing both the ubiquity of the image and blurring the distinction between deskilled and conceptual practices. His portraits capture unexpected subjects, such as an inflatable alien toy, or the pre-teen drag queen Lactacia dolled up in Western wear. Kitschy salt and pepper shakers in the shape of turkeys replace the domestic abundance associated with still life painting-now covered in electric green slime, as if molded over or infected with American toxic masculinity. He uses patterns that seem like innocuous backdrops; and yet, in their repetition, emoji graphics, mycological spores, or even portraits of artist Richard Prince evacuate the illusion of tangible space, heightening tension within the construction of the image. This body of work coheres around the performative residue in the photograph's reproduction of reality: relics of domestic comfort promote a sense of phoniness inherent in stylized nostalgia, while the enigmatic expression of a cover model looking up from her phone emphasizes both the subject's and the viewer's complicity in the fabrication of everyday life. Roe Ethridge was born in 1969 in Miami, Florida, and lives and works in New York. His photographs have appeared in solo exhibitions at the Institute of Contemporary Art, Boston; the Garage Center for Contemporary Culture, Moscow; and Le Consortium, Dijon, France. Ethridge has also been included in group exhibitions at notable institutions including: the Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York; Aspen Art Museum, Aspen, Colorado; the Whitney Museum of American Art; the Barbican Center, London; MoMA PS1, New York; the Museum of Contemporary Art, Chicago; and the Hammer Museum, Los Angeles.

Gladstone 64 is pleased to present an exhibition of new works by Robert Bechtle for the artist's first show at our uptown gallery. An early pioneer of the Photorealist movement, Bechtle has worked for nearly 60 years visualizing a characteristically American setting through depictions of friends, family and streetscapes in his native San Francisco Bay Area. This exhibition focuses on Bechtle's charcoal drawings that illustrate the residential streets of Alameda, and pays special attention to those which complement light and shadow, architecture and automobile with distinct photographic precision. In this latest body of works, Bechtle demonstrates his deeply attuned and uncanny personal approach to documenting contemporary American culture with extraordinary accuracy. Created in 2016 and 2017, Bechtle's new series of drawings captures an indiscernibly timeless view of northern Californian suburban life. Composed with sharp attention to detail, modest visual clues shed light on the contrasting soft and delicate quality of these charcoal drawings while new vantage points offer equally distinct shifts to the far right or left of these frameworks. Alameda, the recurring city in these works and in Bechtle's oeuvre altogether, is alluded to through his inclusion of small bungalow homes and globe-topped streetlamps, which originated in this particular municipality in the early 20th-century. Bechtle spent many of his early years in Alameda, and he captures this community and landscape through incisive, square-format drawings that glimpse more deeply into the banal and the all too often overlooked. By illustrating multiple perspectives of this city through monochromatic drawings, Bechtle quietly shapes the pauses and shadows that find or leave us and displays how photography, memory and personal history influence these meticulous compositions. Often inspired by his own photographs, Bechtle's intimate drawings demonstrate his asute and cinematographic vision, through each work's methodically framed compositions and through his unequivocal attention to capturing divergent forms of natural light. Bechtle's drawings appear like stills from a noir film, quietly examining forlorn, desolate sidewalks and vacant cars that line unidentified streets. This psychological dramaticism is reiterated through sharp and exacting image crops, which force the viewer into a condensed and eerie narrative showing no evidence of who or what might occupy the space outside these scenes he presents. Bechtle is also able to masterfully recreate morning, afternoon and evening light, hightening the palpable realism he captures in these constructed narratives, providing a glimse into his ever explorative eye. Robert Bechtle was born in 1932 in San Francisco, where he continues to live and work. In 2004, the San Francisco Museum of Modern Art organized a lauded retrospective of his work that traveled to the Modern Art Museum of Fort Worth, Texas, and the Corcoran Gallery of Art in Washington, DC. His paintings have been included in major group exhibitions internationally since the 1960s, including "America is Hard to See," Whitney Museum of American Art; "The Artist as His Subject," Museum of Modern Art, New York; Documenta 5, Kassel, Germany; "The American Century: Art and Culture, 1950-2000," Whitney Museum of American Art, New York; "Les Anneés Pop," Centre Pompidou, Paris; and "Infinite Painting," Villa Manin Centro d'Art Contemporanea, Codroipo, Italy. Bechtle was awarded the Francis J. Greenberger Award for continued excellence in painting in 2003.

We are pleased to present an exhibition of historic works by Robert Mapplethorpe, curated by artist, Roe Ethridge. This marks the gallery's first solo presentation as the New York representative of the Robert Mapplethorpe Foundation. Barbara Gladstone showed his work once before when she published the seminal Flowers portfolio in the early 1980s. Ethridge brings his own perspective as a contemporary artist who works in the same genres of portraiture and still life that are touchstones of Mapplethorpe's well-known oeuvre. Drawn from the extensive archive of the Robert Mapplethorpe Foundation, Ethridge has selected both iconic images-including self-portraits, flowers, and scenes of frank sexual provocation-and those exhibited for the first time to evoke his own experience of understanding the breadth of Mapplethorpe's mastery of process and composition. This show offers a compelling new look at Mapplethorpe's distinctive practice: rather than focusing on a specific time or subject, it explores less familiar images and themes that highlight the innovation of his work, still astonishing almost three decades after his death. Ethridge's take on a figure who has loomed large since he began studying the medium, highlights Mapplethorpe's focus on classical and baroque, intimate and public, and restraint and licentiousness. Ethridge states - "Mapplethorpe didn't make pictures of daily life; his daily life was making pictures." He approached the body of work with an eye to contextualizing iconic poses and erotically-charged compositions of Mapplethorpe's friends, lovers, and the world around him within a larger scope of his aesthetic interests and perceptive vision. Precisely posed photographs of his lover, Milton Moore, are accompanied by more candid portraits of Moore's niece and nephew-a nod to the intimate familiarity Mapplethorpe shared with many of his subjects. Ethridge's presentation reveals mannerist expressions, unexpected subjects, and humorous moments: Patti Smith's entranced gaze with prophetic vision, the televisual appeal of actress Morgan Fairchild, and the shock of Baby Larry, all encompass Mapplethorpe's incisive eye for beauty and perversity. Roe Ethridge surveys Mapplethorpe's legacy and sees the work afresh in a contemporary light. In this way, he presents these works to show both its historical significance and its potential to enthrall and surprise audiences in new ways. Mapplethorpe's freedom to experiment and make pictures of his daily life continues to inspire Ethridge, who states: "I had a secret trust with Mapplethorpe's work; it was giving me license to do what I was doing as a photographer." Robert Mapplethorpe (1946-1989) was born and raised in Queens, New York. Mapplethorpe attended the Pratt Institute in Brooklyn from 1963 to 1969, where he majored in Graphic Arts and worked primarily in painting, sculpture and collage. It was not until the 1970s when the artist Sandy Daley gave Mapplethorpe a Polaroid camera that he began to experiment with photography, which he originally used as a means to document his mixed-media artworks, and develop his signature style. During his lifetime, Mapplethorpe had impressive solo exhibitions at some of the most acclaimed institutions around the world, including the Institute of Contemporary Art, Philadelphia; the Museum of Contemporary Art, Chicago; the National Portrait Gallery, London; the Stedelijk Museum, Amsterdam; and the Whitney Museum of American Art, New York. After his untimely death from AIDS in 1989, Mapplethorpe has been the subject of solo exhibitions at major international museums, including the Galleria dell'Accademia, Florence, Italy; Grand Palais, Paris, France; Musée Rodin, Paris, France; Moderna Museet, Stockholm, Sweden; Musée des beaux-arts de Montréal, Canada; and State Hermitage Museum, St. Petersburg, Russia. Mapplethorpe is currently the subject of a major touring retrospective, The Perfect Medium, which opened at the J. Paul Getty Museum and Los Angeles County Museum of Art (LACMA), Los Angeles in 2016, and has recently toured to Montreal Museum of Fine Arts, Canada and the Art Gallery of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia, on view through March 4, 2018.

We are pleased to present Cyprien Gaillard's second exhibition with the gallery in New York and the United States premiere of his film, Nightlife. Shot entirely at night over the course of two years, this three-dimensional film connects a series of divergent natural and cultural phenomena throughout Cleveland, Los Angeles and Berlin. Organized into distinct chapters, Nightlife optically, audibly and conceptually brings together an obscure yet significant mix of historical monuments and occurrences, forming a hyper psychedelic experience. This ambitious production ties together several key themes that recur throughout the artist's oeuvre, such as cultural relics, preservation and entropy, and speaks to the multidisciplinary nature of his practice. Nightlife chronicles four interconnected subjects: Auguste Rodin's The Thinker installed at the Cleveland Museum of Art; non-indigenous plants scattered throughout the Los Angeles basin; the annual Pyronale firework event at the Olympiastadion in Berlin; and the Jesse Owens Olympic oak tree at the James Ford Rhodes High School in Cleveland. The film begins with the camera panning over an unidentifiable undulating green form that resembles an indiscernible tropical leaf. As the camera continues rightward, showing the viewer a scaly, dense metal object, Rodin's The Thinker is unveiled in its full form. One of the last casts overseen directly by Rodin, this work is shown in its current state outside the Cleveland Museum of Art. In 1970, the work was partially destroyed by a bombing attributed to a cell of the anti-imperialist group 'Weather Underground.' Through the lens of stereoscopic vision, Rodin's damaged thinker permeates the exhibition space, establishing both the spectral and sculptural nature of this film. The viewer is then transported to Los Angeles, where different species of street vegetation appear to dance throughout the city. Yearning and swaying against artificial barriers and anonymous buildings adorned with pulsating bursts of technicolored lights, Gaillard records and highlights the various florae's humanistic qualities. Each plant seems to respond to the light and music in a choreographed and humanistic way, creating a trance-like spectacle of movement. Primarily focusing on the Hollywood Juniper, an East Asian species of trees that Gaillard has returned to throughout his practice, these plants directly engage and struggle with the imposing architectural forms they are situated alongside, providing a deeper narrative about cross-cultural cohabitation. In the third act of Nightlife, the setting shifts to the Olympiastadion, the site of the 1936 Summer Olympics in Berlin for the annual Pyronale fireworks event, a two-day international pyrotechnical competition. Built from 1934 - 36 during the Nazi regime, this Stadium was once a monument to the Third Reich and a symbol of Germany's connections to World War II, but is now used for a multitude of contemporary events. The viewer enters the scene at ground level, but is stealthily levitated into a field of fireworks, entering an abstracted landscape of lights and motion. Gaillard captures the action of this event in one long take from a unique aerial perspective, moving through blasts of light and plumes of smoke, forms that resemble ghostly depictions of trees or gun smoke from a violent battlefield. The event looks like a cosmic blast, blurring the line between reality and a hallucinogenic trip. The film concludes in Cleveland at the site of Jesse Owens' Olympic oak planted at the Ford Rhodes High School. Owens, who won four gold medals at the 1936 Olympic Games, was awarded four oak saplings by Hitler, one of which still lives on today outside the stadium where he trained. The sapling turned full-grown tree is illuminated from multiple perspectives by a circling helicopter, creating a cascade of shadows that dance throughout the trees sturdy branches. Mirroring the three-dimensionality of the film's visual narrative is the dub soundtrack to Nightlife, a space-filling and deliberately low-tech soundscape made by the artist using a variety of analog filters and basic sound effects, such as reverb and delay, creating a disorienting illusion of expanded space. The soundtrack features a sample from the chorus of rocksteady singer's Alton Ellis' song, Blackman's Word, played on a loop throughout the film's first three acts. Originally released in 1969 on the Treasure Isle label, the lyrics sang, "I was born a loser." The song was later re-recorded on a rival label, Coxsone, in 1971, and the song's title was changed and the chorus sang, "I was born a winner," a subtle yet powerful audible transformation that is reflected in the film as Gaillard turns his attention to Jesse Owens' Olympic oak. Cyprien Gaillard was born in Paris and lives and works in Berlin and New York. He has been the subject of solo exhibitions at a number of major international institutions, including: Julia Stoschek Collection in collaboration with K20 - Kunstsammlung Nordrhein-Westfalen, Düsseldorf; Hammer Museum, Los Angeles; MoMA PS1, New York; Fondazione Nicola Trussardi, Milan; Schinkel Pavillon, Berlin; Centre Georges Pompidou, Paris; Kunst-Werke Institute for Contemporary Art, Berlin; Museum für Moderne Kunst, Zollamt, Frankfurt am Main; and Kunsthalle Basel, Basel.

Gladstone 64 is pleased to present Mostly Drawing, an exhibition of new works by Amy Sillman. This show marks the artist's first exhibition with Gladstone Gallery. As the show's title self-referentially indicates, this exhibition is comprised primarily of works on paper incorporating silkscreened, painted, and drawn elements that continue Sillman's decades-long examination into the ideological underpinnings of the term Drawing itself. In each work, the artist employs formal dualities from the art historical canon – namely, narration versus abstraction, color versus line, flat versus recessive space, and painting versus drawing – not as a means to a conceptual end, but rather as a method to push these painterly concerns to their extremes. The works on view therefore defy easy categorization, as each one appears to vacillate between overt abstraction and coded figuration, between traditional painting and comic illustration. Yet this simultaneous presentation of dissimilar components does not imply incompatibility. The heterogeneity evident in every composition invites the viewer to resist the pictorial resolutions that one seeks in finished artworks, and instead revel in the liminal space that Sillman creates using her own visual language. This indulgence in multeity evolves from the artist's process. Refuting the classic dichotomy of fast drawings and slow paintings, Sillman's works do not exist within a fixed chronology of creation. Some compositions are made in a day, others in a week, and some over the course of months. What is of primary concern to Sillman is the examination of the hierarchy between media that seemingly exists in artmaking. By refusing to acknowledge any media-specific pecking order within each picture – Are these drawings? Prints? Paintings? Or none of the above? – the artist generates works that encourage an interrogation of art production that is both ethical in nature and engaging in situ. In relation to their installation at Gladstone 64, Sillman's excited, overflowing compositions also play with the comfort connoted by the townhouse setting of the gallery. The dialogue between work and location, while seemingly jarring, invites a sense of unease to coexist with the traditional prettiness of modernist architecture. Through this gesture, the artist creates a setting wherein the sensation of comfortlessness is inverted to seem not only allowable, but also desirable. Two events celebrating the recent publication of Amy Sillman: The ALL-OVER (Dancing Foxes Press, Mousse and Portikus; 2017) will be held in conjunction with Mostly Drawing: the first, a book signing at Gladstone 64, on January 27 from 3-5pm; the second, a film screening and signing at Metrograph on March 4. Amy Sillman was born in 1955 in Detroit, Michigan, and currently lives and works in New York. Since 2015, she has been professor of painting at the Städelschule in Frankfurt am Main. Sillman's work has been the subject of numerous solo exhibitions at institutions including: Albright Knox Art Gallery, Buffalo, New York; Drawing Center, New York; Portikus, Frankfurt am Main, Germany; Kunsthaus Bregenz, Austria; and The Hirshhorn Museum and Sculpture Garden, Washington, D.C. Beginning at the Institute of Contemporary Art, Boston in 2014, Sillman's solo exhibition, "one lump or two," traveled to the Aspen Art Museum in Colorado and the Center for Curatorial Studies at Bard College, New York. Her works are held in the public collections of such prominent institutions as Art Institute of Chicago; Brooklyn Museum, New York; Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York; Museum of Modern Art, New York; National Gallery of Art, Washington D.C.; and the Whitney Museum of American Art, New York.

We are pleased to present an exhibition of historic works by Pierre Klossowski (1905-2001), the artist's first exhibition with the gallery in Brussels and his first gallery show in Belgium. A prolific late in life artist who was internationally acclaimed for his writings and translations on Sadeian erotic expression, Klossowski is a pivotal yet underrepresented figure in the history of 20th-century art, often overshadowed by his earlier literary work and his younger brother, Balthus. This exhibition brings together a selection of works from Klossowski's most significant and transformative period of artmaking, and celebrates the important historical impact of his work both during and after his life. Klossowski, who was raised by a painter and an art historian, grew up in a creative environment, leading to his future collaborations with writers and academics, including André Gide, Jean Paulhan and Rainer Maria Rilke. These early introductions to diverse forms of literary and artistic expression resulted in a complex portfolio of essays, books and drawings that explored themes such as modernity, sexuality and violence. It was not until the 1950s when Klossowski began to publish and exhibit his inventive and erotically charged artworks, at first as illustrations for his risqué texts. He employed a signature style that combined techniques of Italian Mannerism with the cerebral and aesthetical sensibilities of Surrealism, demonstrating a well-rounded and astute knowledge of art history. Primarily working with pencil and charcoal, the laborious drawings he produced reference a variety of subjects, including Greek mythology, Sadean decadence, medieval fantasy and sexualized scenarios involving a recurring female figure, Roberte. These imagined scenes depict a perplexing and intriguing array of mature, familiar and fantastical situations involving cartoonish human figures set in fictitious landscapes that uniquely relate back to the dystopic realities he creates. Pierre Klossowski (1905-2001) was born in Paris and lived between France, Germany and Switzerland before his death. His work has been the subject of major survey exhibitions at Schinkel Pavillon, Berlin (2017); Circulo de Bellas Artes de Madrid, Madrid (2007); Centre Pompidou – Musée National d'Art Moderne, Paris (2007); Museum Ludwig, Köln(2006); Whitechapel Art Gallery, London (2006); Sala Parpallo, Valencia (1991); Museo Nacional Centro de Arte Reina Sofia, Madrid (1991); and Kunsthalle, Bern (1981). Klossowski's works were included in documenta 7, Kassel, in 1982. The Artist authored several publications, including Le Bain de Diane (1980); Le Baphomet (1965); Nietzsche et le cercle vicieux (1969); La Monnaie vivant (1970); and the trilogy Les Lois de l'hospitalité, consisted of Roberte ce soir (1954), La Révocation de l'édit de Nantes (1959), and Le Souffleur (1960).

We are pleased to present the New York debut of Belgian artist Kasper Bosmans. Rooted in historical research, Bosmans disentangles the intersection of signs that create cultural meaning in both micro and macro registers. His interdisciplinary works include institutional intervention, installation, sculpture, and painting that parse and restructure the objects and symbols from varied political, artistic, and social orders. For this exhibition, entitled Chip Log, Bosmans investigates diverse cultural relics—taken from the realms of government, folk art, and technology—in order to establish new modes of reading the history of power and knowledge that linger in spaces between concept and material. Bosmans constructs his installation in rebus-like chapters evoking political artifacts and labor practices reified into material gestures: the famed Amber Room of Friedrich I and Star Chamber of Henry VIII, sites associated with monarchical overreach; the Ebstorf Mappa Mundi, a 13th century map of the known world from the European perspective; nautical hand logs, instruments used to measure the speed of a ship; and signature quilts, a folk practice of fundraising to honor veterans. Presented as an ensemble of painting, sculpture, textile, and wallpaper, he critiques the traditions and inventions of European institutions of power through rendering them as inert aestheticobjects. Deconstructing and rearranging recognizable historical narratives throughout this installation, Bosmans takes a critical survey of larger holistic patterns and idiosyncratic cultural connections that reinforce power, production, and knowledge. As in his Legends paintings, small-scale works that employ legible symbols and graphic relationships as linguistic antecedent, Bosmans translates the mythic signification of these cultural relics into plastic materiality through facsimile and abstraction. In this way, his installation directs the viewer to decipher paths connecting design and politics as it threads through the varied chapters of politics, technology, and folk culture. Kasper Bosmans was born in 1990 and lives and works in Brussels and Amsterdam. Recent exhibitions include: A Temporary Futures Institute at M HKA, Antwerp (2017); The Words and Days (mud gezaaid, free range), De Hallen, Haarlem (2017); Kathmandu Triennale, Nepal (2017); Poetica_Politica, Foundation de 11 Lijnen, Oudenburg (2016); Decorations, Witte de With Centre for Contemporary Art, Rotterdam (2016); Specimen Days, S.M.A.K., Ghent (2016); Loot, Soil, and Cleanliness, CIAP, Hasselt (2016); Motif (Oil and Silver), Marc Foxx Gallery, Los Angeles (2016); Yesterday was different with Marthe Ramm Fortun, KOMPLOT, Brussels (2015); Des hôtes: a foreigner, a human, an unexpected visitor, Spring Workshop, Hong Kong (2015); Little Cherry Virus, P/////akt, Amsterdam (2015); Un-Scene III, Wiels, Brussels (2015). Bosmans' work will be on view at the Hammer Museum in Los Angeles from January 28 - May 6, 2018 as a part of the group exhibition, Stories of Almost Everyone.

We are pleased to present Lemons and Grapefruits, an exhibition of small scale oil paintings by Gedi Sibony, his third exhibition with the gallery in Brussels. Starting with found or secondhand store paintings that have drifted away from authorship and ownership, Sibony seeks something more in each canvas, intervening into each painting's surface. Known for his staging of cast away objects, here Sibony exercises an intimate and searching involvement using oil paint, with a sometimes light and occasionally heavy touch, to honor and regain some of the space and aspects of the paintings—both highlighting and reconfiguring these jettisoned reflections on objects in space. Sibony's perceptive approach to placing found items in carefully considered architectural contexts is further explored with this new body of work by zeroing in on the moderate scale. Sibony pays close attention to his exhibitions' methodical layouts, and here through his application of paint, works inside each found painting's visual flow. Through this process, he transforms two-dimensional space in a similar way to how he plays with spatial continuity in the three-dimensional realm. Gedi Sibony was born in 1973 in New York, where he currently lives and works. Recent solo exhibitions include Douglas Hyde Gallery, Dublin; Pulitzer Foundation for the Arts, St. Louis; Culturgest, Lisbon; and Contemporary Art Museum St. Louis. In 2015, Sibony was featured in "All the World's Futures" at the 56th Venice Biennale, curated by Okwui Enwezor. His work is included in the collections of the Museum of Modern Art, New York; the San Francisco Museum of Modern Art; the Walker Art Center, Minneapolis; and the Whitney Museum of American Art, New York.

We are pleased to present an exhibition of historic works by Brazilian painter Alfredo Volpi (1896 – 1988), the first solo presentation of his work in the United States. Volpi is regarded as one of the most influential and celebrated Brazilian painters, who the preeminent public intellectual Mario Pedrosa called "the master of his time." Honing his craft during the rise of modernism in Brazil, Volpi has made a lasting impact on the history of art through his signature approach to depicting the forms of everyday experiences—from festival banners to common row houses—in vibrantly chromatic abstraction. Tangentially connected with Concretism, the mid-century Brazilian artistic movement that included Tarsila do Amaral, Waldemar Cordeiro and others, Volpi occupied a liminal space between naïve and fine art, as a selftaught artist with a distinct aesthetic style that distinguished his work from the academic painters of his time. Volpi emigrated from Lucca, Italy to São Paulo, Brazil as a child, spending the remainder of his life in Cambuci, which inspired the city and seascapes that filled his oeuvre. Volpi first explored the medium of paint as an apprentice to a wall decorator, where he not only perfected a craftsman's ability to prepare surfaces and mix pigments, but also became interested in architecture and urban space. In the 1930s, Volpi began to paint in his free time, turning to subjects that were immediately at hand—namely Cambuci and the surrounding area. However, it was not until the end of that decade when he began to fully develop a signature style of painting. Throughout the 1940s and 1950s, Volpi began to depict building façades and rudimentary flags in his paintings using a parti-colored array of tempera paints. Volpi's evocative and thoughtfully considered color palettes transformed these everyday scenes and subjects into abstract patterned landscapes, connecting his fine art practice with his early work as a designer. This initial impulse to deconstruct and reshow elements of everyday life through his unique style of painting also demonstrated his early attempts at pushing the boundaries of early modern art practices. This exhibition focuses on the different aspects of his practice during his most engaging phase between the late 1950s and mid 1970s. Gathering major works, many of which have never been exhibited outside of Brazil, the paintings on view survey the façade, banner, and nautical paintings with which he is most associated. On this occasion, the first major monograph in English of Volpi's work will be published which includes a new essay on his work by scholar Rodrigo Moura and historical writings on the artists by Aracy de Amaral, Willys de Castro, and Mario Pedrosa, translated into English for the first time. Alfredo Volpi was born in 1896 in Lucca, Italy, and died in 1988 in São Paulo. Throughout his lifetime, Volpi had solo exhibitions at Museu de Arte Moderna de São Paulo; Instituto de Arquitetos do Brasil, Porto Alegre, Brazil; Museu de Arte Contemporânea, Campinas, Brazil; Biblioteca Municipal Mario de Andrade, São Paulo; Companhia do Metropolitano de São Paulo - Metrô; and Museu de Arte Moderna do Rio de Janeiro. Subsequent to his death in 1988, many institutions have shown Volpi's work, including Paulo Kuczynski Escritório de Arte, São Paulo; Museu de Arte Contemporânea da Universidade de São Paulo; Palais des Beaux-Arts de Bruxelles, Belgium; Instituto Moreira Salles, Rio de Janeiro; Instituto de Arte Contemporânea, São Paulo; Paço Imperial, Rio de Janeiro; Museu Oscar Niemeyer, Curitiba, Brazil; Museo de Arte Latinoamericano de Buenos Aires, Buenos Aires, Argentina; Espaço Cultural Banco Central, São Paulo; Museu de Valores do Banco Central, Brasília, Brazil; Centro Cultural São Paulo; Museu Nacional de Belas-Artes, Rio de Janeiro; Centro Cultural Laurinda Santos Lobo, Rio de Janeiro; and Pinacoteca do Estado de São Paulo. In 1953, Volpi won the prestigious Grand Prix for Brazilian painting at the second São Paulo Art Biennial. Volpi was also included in the Venice Biennale in 1950, 1952, 1954, 1962 and 1964. Cultural Support Instituto Volpi 2017 We thank the cultural support of Instituto Alfredo Volpi de Arte Moderna, a non-profit institution, which has a legal duty to ensure the preservation and dissemination of the painter's memory and artistic work; in particular for recognizing the importance of this initiative for the international dissemination of the artist.

The Ripple Paintings. Not your everyday semi-realistic preparatory plaster castor fresco with a splash of satiric humor over a Whitney Darrow caricature. Sidebar: Darrow is one of Richard's "fab's". A longtime New Yorker cartoonist. He was also Jackson Pollock's roommate. A little of this. A little of that. How hard can it be? The Ripple Paintings are in the middle of two bodies of work. The first body… Super Group. The third body… High Times. The Ripple Paintings were made between 2015 and 2017. Richard Prince told me "the rips" started off ("Major Tom'd"), by collecting cartoons published in Playboy. Cartoons that were originally published between the years 1967 and 1970. "Three years that I remember, revisit, still think about. The turn on, turn up years. The years the circle replaced the square. The years the groove moved the twist and the uptight and upright lost its vote. The years Mr. Jones didn't know what hit him. These years opened up and let me out. Man, I felt like I cleaned house. All the phony baloney shot out of my ass. All my life I had been lied too. Now I was awake. I was receptive. And all I needed was something to agree with. Between 1967 and 1970 I agreed to say no." "I've been working on the railroad." Richard told me it was a simple idea. "The cartoons that were submitted to the magazine were watercolors. That's what was handed in, delivered to the art director. It was how they were made. Gouache on illustration board. Sketch, wash, and punch line. I bought the magazines on e-bay. I bought thirty-six issues. I flipped thru the magazine and tore my favorite "toons" out of the magazine, put the torn page on the floor, and poured more watercolor on the cartoon. Water on water. My red watercolor on their yellow cartoon. Fifty/fifty. My contribution? My psychotic breakdown of my psychic connection. Also a contrasting color. My red water on their yellow water. I would come back the next morning and my red would dry in its own way. It had personality. Travel, leak, pool, stains and puddles. And on the way to drying, the dry would ripple the paper. The pour would do its thing. A secret 'cover'. The drying stayed up all night. Land of a thousand dances. The spread of my watercolor really didn't have to do with me. It was independent. The form had a life of its own, a mind of its own, and each morning after 'the evaporation'… I got a surprise." "Trippy." I asked Richard if he could pass The Acid Test. "Probably not." "I've always been a fan of Ken Kesey. 'It's the truth even if it didn't happen.' 'And when you lose your laugh you lose your footing.' But I'm late to the Grateful Dead. I just started listening." Then he went on a little Birdtalk about the Ripples. "They're sexy. Hit and miss. Anyone can find me. Everybody has to listen to Mom. Balance.org. Unmasking? Good luck. Most of the time I don't have much fun. The rest of the time I don't have any fun at all. Que Sera Sera. (I wish)" Richard kept telling me it was a stupid idea. I'm not even sure he said "idea". But he did say "stupid". He emphasized the word. Like it was a badge. A medal. An award. "You don't have to look up the word in the dictionary. If you do, your probably not an artist." He riffed that like it was one of his joke paintings. He liked that his stupid idea lacked common sense. He repeated. Watercolor on watercolor. "More water. More color?" It wasn't a question. It was a fact. And Richard likes to have facts in his works. Non-fiction. Something he can point to and name. He likes his titles to be what they are. The mistakes are great and he loves making them, but coming up with a name for the mistakes has to be a bull's-eye. It's about helping. "Don't get mad. Get glad." Eliminate the posture. Eliminate the guessing. The speculation. The subjectivity. Richard doesn't like politics of symposium. A second coat of paint. The jet is nothing but hardware. Richard knew how he wanted to translate the new covering. Ink jet. He's been using Ink Jet since 1985. He told me back in '85 there were only two places in the country you could "send away" for an ink jet print. "It was primitive. Four colors sprayed out on a glossy tarp. The interpretation wasn't very sophisticated and the reproduction of what you wanted reproduced was usually dull, cheap, and not very accurate." A lot has changed. Now you can have your own machine and instead of sending away to a commercial lab, you can spend the afternoon typing and coding exactly what you want and watch what comes out in your own space. Echo. Soul. Emotion. The three ghosts are like Casper. Friendly. Convenient too. Immediate. No waiting. "No saving up box tops and sending them off to Battle Creek Michigan." "Ancient footprints are everywhere. You can almost think that you're seein' double. Someday, everything is gonna be smooth like a rhapsody." There are all kinds of canvas and paper you can put through the printer, and the way the ink jets out... is fast, sweet, positive. It's like some kind of new carburetor blending air and injecting fuel into a proper ratio. It bursts out a combustion of implausible liquid juice. "Mine has a Holley and nitrous oxide. It's a clean machine. It's not a miracle, but it does the job." "I'll take my chances." "Electronic scissor." Richard tells me that's how he use to describe re-photography back in 1977. And cartoons? He's been dealing with the subject since 1985. "I wanted something to draw, so I re-drew cartoons." "I love cartoons. Funny drawings. Serious humor. Subversive. Laugh out loud. Another way of surviving. They're part of the magazine. And I've always liked to open up a magazine and see what's up. Every magazine is an Inside World." Paintings R Us. After the jet, the canvas is stretched by Kevin from Philadelphia. "He's the man with the plan." This might not mean much, but the image of what's printed is wrapped around the edge of the stretcher an eighth inch. It's not on top, it's around. Not much around, but around. Just enough. Formalism? Okay. Ingredients matter. But I think Richard would describe it more like homework. That little 1/8 counts. Without it, the painting is a B-plus. When I went to his studio to see the paintings, it's all he would talk about. But he didn't think it was important to anyone but him. He's resigned. He knew that the viewer, the audience... wouldn't pay attention. What's forward and impactful for him is function and pleasure. The combination is in the details. Discovery takes time. He went on to say, "What's underneath, the subtext, the "wild history"… can take years. People are bouncing. That's what people do these days. The electric stampede is so jammed up you need to stream Einstein's pipe to go to sleep. What can I say? How about the caption in that cartoon?" (He points to a Ripple that's covered in a fracture of purple blaze). 'In dreams begin responsibility.' Big pieces of color. That's what the Ripples are. How do you make a new abstract painting? That's the last thing I asked Richard. "I don't know," he said. "I don't think that way. How do I make? I go to work. I go to my studio. Shut the door and listen to Wilco." There's a pause. He looks at his shoes. He lifts one foot off the floor. "I can only stand this way for so long. After awhile I start to wobble." I'm not sure what he means. Then he's back. Where did he go? "But yea, abstraction. One thing leads to another. Sometimes I get lucky. Hilma af Klint. She belonged to the five. A circle of women that tried to get in touch with the high masters. Not one master but several. Intuition. Alchemy. Séance. We're talking 1906. Her spiritual non -objective paintings pre-dated Kandinsky. She ate Kandinsky's heart out. She died after a traffic accident. I take that knowing into my studio. I take everything I can get. So of course, abstraction. The absence of consequences. What do they say?...'painting the unseen'. So yea. But I like a good story better." Joan Katz Joan Katz is a journalist, living in Prague, who has known Richard Prince since 1989. In 1990 Prince and Katz formed a band called Black Bra when they were both living in Rome. Publications

We are pleased to present DE-PIXELATION, an exhibition of new work from Thomas Hirschhorn's Pixel-Collage series. Over the last two years, Hirschhorn has embarked on this deeply personal, political and socially-engaged body of work that explores the limitations and deceitfulness of imagery found throughout popular culture and the media. Employing a mix of collaging techniques, Hirschhorn's work from the Pixel-Collage series calls into question the legitimacy of imagery that has been altered to protect the viewer from unpleasant depictions of gruesome human suffering and violence. This exhibition marks the conclusion of the Pixel-Collage series. In a statement from the artist: "De-Pixelation" is the title of my exhibition at Gladstone Gallery. I will exclusively present new "Pixel-Collage". The exhibition will mark the ending of the "Pixel-Collage"-series that I have been working on for two years. My engagement in the problematic of 'pixelation' and 'de-pixelation' comes from the decision to see and look at the world as it is, and to insist in doing so. I believe that 'de-pixelation', 'pixelation', blurring or masking and furthermore censorship or self-censorship, is a growing and insidious issue, also in the social media today. I don't accept that, under the claim of 'protecting' - protecting me, protecting the other - the world is pixelated in my place. I want, I can, I need and I must use my own eyes to see everything in our world, as act of emancipation. 'De-pixelation' is the term I use to manifest that pixelating no longer makes sense. Pixels, blurring, masking, and censorship in general, can no longer hold back or conceal fake-news, facts, opinions or comments. Fake-news, facts, opinions, comments entirely take part in the "Post-Truth". We have definitely entered the post-truth world. Pixelation stands for the form of agreement in this post-truth world. I want to insist heavily on what makes me work in a kind of urgency and necessity: The world has to be 'de-pixelated'. I want to question and integrate the growing phenomena of 'facelessness' today. What interests me about the aesthetic of 'facelessness' is its formal embodiment through pixelation. This phenomenon shows us that a picture needs to be pixelated, or partly pixelated, in order to be authentic. What interests me is that pixelating has taken over the role of authenticity. Partly pixelated pictures look even more authentic and are accepted as such. Pixels stand for authentication: Authentication through authority, because to pixelate is always an authoritarian act. What interests me is that pixelating - as an aesthetic - meets the demand for authority, for protection, for de-responsibilization and for de-emancipation. What interests me about this aesthetic, is that through pixels, abstraction can engage me in today's world, time and reality. How can I redefine my idea of abstraction today? What interest me is that I can understand abstraction as thinking, as political thinking. What interests me is that pixels build up a new form opening towards a dynamic and a desire for truth, truth as such, truth as something reaching beyond information, non-information or counter-information. Paradoxically - the authoritarian will to use pixelation in order to hide, 'protect', not show, or make something not visible, has become an invitation to touch truth. To touch truth does not mean verifying information; to touch truth is the beautiful gesture of emancipation. What interest me about the form of the "Pixel-Collage", is its 'belief' in the aesthetic of pixilation as abstraction. What interests me is that an existing published picture can become an abstraction. 'Pixelation' is a decision, not a technique or a system. Removing or adding a pixel - or even cutting it into smaller pixel parts - is a political decision. "Pixel-Collage" are collages. A collage means pasting together at least two existing elements to create something new, a new world, a new image, a new light. Doing this means giving a response - through Form: Form is not just an idea, Form is the core. I want to give Form, and in giving Form I must show what I see, what I understand, what comes from myself without explanation or argumentation. In its own and non-systematic logic, the composition of each "Pixel-Collage" serves as the fundament: I want to reinforce the beauty of the pixelated part opposed to the non-pixelated part. I want to focus on its logic. Nothing is un-showable. The only thing which cannot be shown is what has no form. Everything within our world that is Form is showable and viewable, even when incommensurable. In order to confront the world, to struggle with it, with its chaos, its hyper-complexity, its incommensurability, I need to confront reality without distance. It is necessary to distinguish 'sensitivity', which to me means being awake and attentive, from 'hypersensitivity', which means self-enclosure and exclusion. The "De-Pixelation" works will perhaps be judged 'difficult', but what is really difficult is to do an artwork today, in contact with complexity, in contact with reality, in contact with the time we are living in and in contact with the world. Today, more than ever, I need to see everything with my own eyes in our one world, no one can tell me what to see or not see. Therefore, I want to 'de-pixelate' the world, I want to live in a de-pixelated world. Thomas Hirschhorn, Paris 2017 On Saturday, October 28, Hirschhorn will be joined by Hal Foster for a discussion about the Pixel-Collage series at 530 West 21st Street at 4pm. Thomas Hirschhorn was born in 1957 in Bern, Switzerland, and currently lives and works in Paris. His work has been the subject of numerous solo exhibitions including at Kunsthal Aarhus; South London Gallery; Kunsthalle Bremen; Institute of Modern Art Brisbane; Dia Art Foundation, New York; Kunsthalle Mannheim; Museo Tamayo; Musee d'Art contemporain de Montreal; Museo de Arte Contemporaneo de Castilla y Leon; Institute of Contemporary Art, Boston; Centre Georges Pompidou, Paris; Museu d'Art Contemporani, Barcelona; Kunsthaus Zürich; Art Institute of Chicago; Museum Ludwig, Cologne; and Secession, Vienna. Thomas Hirschhorn's 'Presence and Production' projects include among others: Musée Précaire Albinet, Aubervilliers, France, 2004, The Bijlmer Spinoza-Festival, Amsterdam, 2009, Gramsci Monument in the Bronx, New York, 2013, Flamme éternelle at Palais de Tokyo, Paris, 2014, and SPERR at Wiesbaden Biennale, 2016. Additionally, he has taken part in many international exhibitions, including the 2012 La Triennale at the Palais de Tokyo in Paris; the Swiss Pavilion of the 2011 Venice Biennale with his work Crystal of Resistance, Documenta 11 in Kassel, Germany, where his large-scale public work, Bataille Monument, was on view; "Heart of Darkness" at the Walker Art Center; and "Life on Mars: the 55th Carnegie International." Hirschhorn was the recipient of the Prix Marcel Duchamp in 2000, the Joseph Beuys-Preis in 2004 and the Kurt Schwitters Prize in 2011.

We are pleased to present bewtie, an exhibition of new paintings by Belgian artist Walter Swennen. The artist's second show with the gallery expands Swennen's deeply personal approach to the medium and practice of painting. During his acclaimed, nearly 40-year career, Swennen has worked without one signature style to categorize his artistic oeuvre. Rather, he employs his background in philosophy, poetry and psychoanalysis to create works that are defined by the absence of a single perspective or framework. Language plays a crucial role in Swennen's work, tied closely to the artist's own history. At a young age, his family stopped speaking his mother tongue of Flemish and began to speak French. After several years, he was unable to speak or understand Flemish, complicating his understanding of how language could be used as an effective form of communication between people. Letters, fragments and statements in English, Flemish and French often infiltrate his canvases, both providing or removing any sense of narrative or context. In this multidisciplinary approach, Swennen mines his memory to source imagery from history and popular culture to examine the lyrical possibilities of painting that prioritize gesture, texture and technique over subject matter. Melding images from his mind with motifs and subjects appropriated from comic strips, advertisements and children's drawings, Swennen's figuration is as an act of rebellion and deviation that blurs the lines between humor and gravitas, the political and the formal as well as reality and fiction. From September 9 through October 21, White Columns will present a selection of older works by Swennen, alongside a collaborative film made with Jacques Charlier for the Paris Biennial in 1971. On September 16, White Columns will host a screening of the 2016 Walter Swennen documentary "The Crimson Tongue," directed by Violaine de Villiers, followed by a Q & A with the artist. Walter Swennen was born in 1946 in Brussels, where he presently lives and works. His work has been the subject of numerous solo exhibitions at international institutions including Kunstverein für die Rheinlande und Westfalen, Düsseldorf; Culturgest Lisbon; Kunstverein Freiburg; MUKHA Antwerp; Kunsthal Rotterdam; and WIELS contemporary art center, Brussels. Swennen has also been included in notable group exhibitions including: Atopolis, Manège de Sury, Mons (2015); The Importance of Being..., Museo Nacional de Bellas Artes, Havana (2015); Idiolect, Arentshuis, Bruges (2009); La Belgique Visionnaire/Visionair België curated by Harald Szeemann (Palais des Beaux-Arts/Paleis voor Schone Kunsten, Brussels, 2005); Voir en Peinture (FRAC Ile de France/Le Plateau, Paris, 2003); La Consolation (Centre d'Art National Contemporain, Le Magasin, Grenoble, 1999) and Trouble Spot. Painting (Antwerp, 1999).

We are pleased to present Plus Quam Perfekt, an exhibition of work made over the last decade by Rosemarie Trockel. Her diverse practice questions the ontology of the art object and social relations, by integrating traditionally feminine domestic craft and labor, such as textiles and pottery, with the praxis of conceptual art. Drawing on a highly personal survey of gender, the natural world, and the process of mythmaking, Trockel conjures spaces of inquiry that collapse assumptions about the nature of the reproducible and the singular, the individual and the anonymous, the familiar and the arcane. For this exhibition, Trockel will animate the intimate spaces of the gallery through a multidisciplinary exhibition of new and recently made works, including ceramics, plexi-glass sculpture, an ensemble of posters, and other media. Further developing motifs and methods from her oeuvre, the pieces on view make material her distinct perspective on the interaction between art-making and being in the world. A series of new ceramic masks, developing a subject referenced in both her drawings and sculptures, are in dialogue with ceramic mirrors—lustrously glazed abstract forms that mingle allusion to the organic and the mechanical. Some of the ceramic pieces have a direct kinship to a series of work based in modeling parts of the body; in others, ambiguous geometries evoke shapes found both in the home and in nature. The notion of time also stretches across different media—from a plexi-glass sculpture that contains clockworks to an assemblage of posters that seem to be quoting and recontextualizing earlier pieces and attendantideas via fragmentary images. While still playing against the expectations of a definitive artistic signature, Trockel's simultaneous deconstruction and reconstruction of thematic and formal part-objects informs an idiosyncratic lexicon of her own. Rosemarie Trockel was born in Schwerte, West Germany in 1952 and now lives and works in Cologne. She has been the subject of major solo exhibitions: most recently Reflections / Riflessoni. Rosemarie Trockel and works from Torino Collections, Pinacoteca Agnelli, Torino, Italy; A Cosmos, which originated at Museo Nacional Centro de Arte Reina Sofía, Madrid and traveled to the New Museum, New York and Serpentine Gallery, London; and Flagrant Delight, which was presented at Wiels, Brussels, Culturgest, Lisbon, and Museion, Bolzano. Trockel has had solo exhibitions at numerous notable institutions including: Kunsthaus Bregenz; Kunstmuseum Basel; Museu Paco das Artes São Paulo; Museum Ludwig, Cologne; The Drawing Center, New York; Centre Georges Pompidou, Paris; Museum of Modern Art, New York; and Kunsthalle Basel. Trockel's work was included in the Italian Pavilion in 2013 and represented Germany at the Venice Biennale in 1999; she participated in Documenta in 1997 and 2012.

We are pleased to present Mel Bochner's first solo show with the gallery and his first exhibition in Brussels for more than 20 years. For this show, Bochner will debut Language Is Not Transparent [Brussels, 2017], a wall piece taking its name from one of the artist's most seminal works first shown at the Dwan Gallery in 1970. Bochner intends for this new iteration to premiere within Belgium's bilingual context: translated into Flemish and French for the first time, this version adds new interpretations and layers of complexity to Bochner's Conceptualist practice. A leading figure of the Conceptual art movement 0f the 1960s and 1970s, Bochner reimagined the wall as a material component, rather than simply a passive surface. Language Is Not Transparent [Brussels, 2017] consists of three black rectangles painted directly onto the wall, reappropriating the Renaissance fresco technique of sinopia. In his decision to work directly on the wall, the artist's hand is clearly visible, via handwritten text in English, French and Flemish, scribbles of white chalk and uneven brushstrokes leaving drops of black paint that almost hit the floor. Bochner's immediate and tangible intervention, without mediation of a canvas or frame, fundamentally changed the relationship between art, public space and the viewer. Language also plays a major role in Bochner's overall artistic practice, and this new version of Language Is Not Transparent exemplifies his idea, as borrowed from philosopher Ludwig Wittgenstein and others, that language is understood through a variety of cultural associations and contexts, without one definable interpretation. Various iterations of Language Is Not Transparent have been shown globally in some of the world's most prestigious museums and institutions, including the Los Angeles County Museum of Art (LACMA), 2017; the National Gallery of Art, Washington D.C., 2016; Villa Arson, Nice, 2010; the Art Institute of Chicago, 2006; and the Yale University Art Gallery, New Haven, 1995. Bochner's first version of Language Is Not Transparent, which is included in LACMA's permanent collection, is currently on view at LACMA through September 10, in "Los Angeles to New York: Dwan Gallery, 1959–1971", organized by the National Gallery of Art, Washington D.C. Mel Bochner was born in Pittsburgh in 1940, and currently lives and works in New York. He earned a BFA in 1962 from the Carnegie Institute of Technology. Bochner's work is represented in some of the most renowned institutions and public collections around the world, including the Museum of Modern Art (New York), Tate Modern (London) and the Whitney Museum of American Art (New York). Recent solo museum exhibitions include The Jewish Museum (New York, 2014), Museù Serralves (Porto, 2013), Haus der Kunst in Munich (Munich, 2012), National Gallery of Art (Washington, 2011), Art Institute of Chicago (2006) and Musée d'art moderne et contemporain (Geneva, 2003).

No one writes lyric on a battlefield On a map stuck with arrows But I think I can do it if I just lurk In my tent pretending to Refeather my arrows —Adrienne Rich, from Quarto, 2009 We are pleased to present Lyric on a Battlefield, a group exhibition organized by Miciah Hussey. The artists featured are: Kelly Akashi, Ellen Berkenblit, Louisa Clement, Anne Collier, Bracha L. Ettinger, Anish Kapoor, Liz Magor, f.marquespenteado, Suzanne McClelland, Dawn Mellor, Monique Mouton, Senga Nengudi, and Kandis Williams. Bringing together artists working in various media, from multiple regions, and of different generations, this exhibition focuses on the lyric—the poetic first-person account of lived experience—to explore the complexities of being in the world. Mirroring the experimental and subjective nature of that form, the works included propose idiosyncratic methods of making visible critical, though complexly personal, interactions between the self and other. Through their translations of poetic reflection into the visual forms of painting, sculpture, drawing, and photography, these artists' different practices expand intimate explorations of desire, social relations, and the environment. Each of these works propose a singular point of view to the viewer; one that asks them to empathize with the life of another as the means to understand the more obscure, complicated aspects of being that inform shared experience. While the lyric seemingly favors the aesthetic over the political, this exhibition seeks to understand how formal experimentation and analysis provides space to reimagine the life of the individual and ethical connections in a time of precarity. As artist Bracha L. Ettinger said in a 2016 interview, "The purpose of art is not to represent reality or to aestheticize it. Art invents images and spaces. Art works like a maternal healing when it solicits against all the odds the human capacity to wonder, to feel awe, to feel compassion, to care, to trust and to carry the weight of the world."

We are pleased to present Pélamide, a group exhibition curated by Lilou Vidal, featuring works by: Nel Aerts, Michael Bauer, Marianne Berenhaut, Michaela Eichwald, Rodrigo Hernández, Cameron Jamie, Ana Jotta, Pierre Klossowski, Gabriel Kuri, Sarah Lucas, Victor Man, Marisa Merz, J Parker Valentine, Walter Swennen and Pieter Vermeersch. Pélamide presents a dialogue with the selected artists of free association, uniting and highlighting elusive, strange, biomorphic and self-determined forms. This exhibition explores the discursive and sensual visuality of art and poetry, and the ways in which these forms serve as sources of disinformation and openness. This exhibition is organized around poetry as a framework; Pélamide is structured around Tristan Tzara's 1918 Dadaist poetry volume, "The Twenty-Five Poems," which puts forward a new form of syntax formed by deconstructing the composition of speech and narration. In tribute to the Dadaist aleatory game, each of the twenty-five works selected are coupled with one of the twenty-five poems by Tzara, paired according to their placement in the exhibition space, creating new and spontaneous textual experiences that a viewer can visually and conceptually explore. Rather than proposing an analytical and theoretical answer to what an exhibition can be, or to speculate the meaning of the artwork, Pélamide proposes an anachronic and shared endeavor to extend the potentials of perception.

We are pleased to present Fall is Cancelled, a group exhibition featuring Georg Baselitz, Maurizio Cattelan, Jim Hodges, Mike Kelley, Robert Mapplethorpe, Calvin Marcus, Philippe Parreno, Ed Ruscha and Wolfgang Tillmans. Fall is Cancelled unites a roster of international artists whose work engages with depictions of the natural world. Installations like Philippe Parreno's Speech Bubbles, which forms a sort of cumulus cloud-like aerial landscape, or the seascape photographs of Robert Mapplethorpe and Wolfgang Tillmans, demonstrate the diversity of methods used to recreate recognizable yet surreal landscapes. Imagery of animals, amphibians and arachnids further demonstrate how natural elements and living creatures are often disrupted through human contact. Mike Kelley's acrylic on canvas painting, All Pink Inside, which portrays a small dissected frog resembling human anatomy to reference Courbet's "The Origin of the World", or Maurizio Cattelan's taxidermized golden Labrador retrievers and chick, remind the viewer of the many ways in which humans alter reality for a mixture of personal or scientific purposes. These various portrayals of nature throughout the exhibition create an unsettling and dystopic landscape of unique forms that conjure different ideas of human intervention. The exhibition's title, inspired by a 2007 satirical article about global warming, "Fall Cancelled After 3 Billion Seasons," reiterates this concept of human disruption throughout nature. Through painting, sculpture, photography and installation, Fall is Cancelled examines a multiplicity of forms of artistic expression that are utilized to challenge the viewer's perceptions of nature and mankind's place within it.

We are pleased to present an exhibition of new work by Shirin Neshat featuring a film and a related series of photographs. Through charged imagery and evocative mise-en-scène, Neshat's photography and film installations critique the cultural construction of difference. This exhibition marks the first time she fully turns her attention to American culture, dissecting the tense and querying experience of being an Iranian in the United States today. In both the film Roja and a new series of photographs, Neshat confronts the ambivalence of living across two cultures and how it coheres to both personal and political identity. To tackle the ambiguous status of the outsider, she utilizes enigmatic images, haunting encounters, and mystified points of view influenced by the surrealist films of Man Ray and Maya Deren. She mobilizes dream logic to represent the disorienting complexity of this fraught subject position and to make visible the double binds of intersectional identity. Roja (2016), drawn from Neshat's own recur­ring dreams, mem­o­ries, and desires, traces an Iranian woman's disquieting attempts at connection with American culture while reconciling her identification with her home country. Encountering her own sense of alienation from both, the titular protagonist experiences how both the foreign and the familiar can become unnerving and hostile. Neshat undermines Roja's social and affective attachments—from a cabaret performance that becomes a nightmarish challenge to her identity, to a recovery of familial bonds that turns increasingly frightening. Throughout the film, she estranges American landscapes—the utopic attempts of government architecture and coalmines that evoke the terrain of the Middle East—to situate Roja within an ambiguous psychic and political terrain. Using non­lin­ear nar­ra­tives and destabilizing in-cam­era techniques, the film questions the relationships that tie us to the world and reveals the transcendence of release into spaces unbounded by socio-historical demarcations. Along with the film, new photographs also represent a departure for Neshat. Well-known for her portrait series in which calligraphy quoting religious texts and poetry enliven the contours of the face, the series takes as it subjects white men and women from the United States, many of who also appear in Roja. Obscured and blurry, these portraits become a metaphor for the mystifications that enforce cultural boundaries and question how socially constructed difference limits sympathetic attachments across race, class, and nationality. Taken together, the film and the photographs open up the discourse of identity beyond a minoritizing view and seek to reconcile global diversity on both the local and psychic registers. Shirin Neshat is an Iranian-born artist and filmmaker living in New York. Neshat is currently the subject of an exhibition at the Museo Correr, an official corollary event to the 57th Biennale di Venezia. She has mounted numerous solo exhibitions at museums internationally, including: the Hirshhorn Museum and Sculpture Garden, Washington D.C.; Stedelijk Museum, Amsterdam; the Serpentine Gallery, London; Hamburger Bahnhof, Berlin; and the Musée d'art contemporain de Montréal. A major retrospective of her work was exhibited at the Detroit Institute of Arts in 2013. Neshat was awarded the Golden Lion Award, the First International Prize at the 48th Biennale di Venezia (1999), the Hiroshima Freedom Prize (2005), and the Dorothy and Lillian Gish Prize (2006). In 2009, Neshat directed her first feature-length film, Women Without Men, which received the Silver Lion Award for "Best Director" at the 66th Venice International Film Festival. Neshat is currently completing her second feature-length film, entitled Looking For Oum Kulthoum.

We are pleased to present an exhibition of three films by artist Cameron Jamie, spanning a decade of work. This installation marks the first time that Jamie has programmed these films, including BB (1998-2000), Kranky Klaus (2002-2003), and Massage the History (2007-2009), to focus on the theme of the home as a site of intersection between public and private rituals. In each of these works, the proximity to his subjects allows him to reveal the uncanny in the cultural fabric. Finding subject matter in diverse fields of play—from the suburban backyards of Los Angeles, to the living rooms of the American South and Alpine villages of Central Europe—these three works investigate the ritualized performativity of violence, arcane tradition, and sexuality. Moving between interior and exterior spaces, the film program traces a mental map connecting rites of passage in different cultures. Additionally, rock bands The Melvins and Sonic Youth, who have expanded the language of rock music, provide hallucinatory soundscapes that are an integral aspect of the films. Massage the History records amateur dancers, whom Jamie found accidentally online, who freely engage the quotidian domestic scene with their own sexually suggestive movements. Unintended for an actual audience, the automatic nature of their body language evolves from an intimate spectacle into a dreamlike scenario of transcendence through onanistic desire. BB captures the semi-choreographed brawls of Southern Californian teens who mimic the movements seen on popular TV wrestling shows. Shot on Super-8, Jamie's film transforms their raw makeshift arena into a social theater of primitive adolescent vaudeville. The rock drone soundtrack provided by The Melvins creates an atemporal space that simultaneously unravels and builds toward its Wagnerian conclusion. Kranky Klaus documents the pagan Christmas celebration of the Krampus—a menacing devil/monster character—in the Alpine villages of Austria's Bad Gastein Valley where St. Nicolas leads participants costumed in horns and fur in a sanctioned ritual of harassment. The film becomes a morality play exploring the cultural symbiosis of good and evil and how violence socializes through performances of cathartic abuses. Cameron Jamie was born in Los Angeles in 1969 and has lived in France since 2000. Jamie will be the subject of a forthcoming retrospective at MAC Lyon in 2018. Presently, he is featured in The Absent Museum at Wiels, Brussels and was most recently included in The Infinite Mix at the Hayward Gallery in 2016. Jamie has been the subject of museum surveys at the Kunsthalle Zurich (2013) and the Walker Art Center, Minneapolis (2006), traveling to the MIT List Visual Arts Center. Jamie has been featured in film festivals and major group exhibitions including Traces du sacré at Centre Georges Pompidou (2008), the Berlin Biennial (2010), the Whitney Biennial (2006), the Venice Biennale (2005), and the 2015 Lyon Biennale. In 2008 Jamie was the first recipient of the Yanghyun Prize and in 2016 was awarded the Daniel and Florence Guerlain Art Foundation prize for drawing.

We are pleased to announce an exhibition of new works by Cyprien Gaillard, the artist's first show at the gallery's Brussels location. This unique presentation expands upon Gaillard's unremitting anthropological inquiry into the rehabilitated readymade and the friction it poses in both material and psychological states. Featuring more than 60 new photographs, as well as large-scale graphite works on paper, this exhibition digs deep into the artist's interest in layered political and social situations on a global scale. His preoccupation with and appreciation of disorder, be it as an aesthetic device or a portal into pedestrian bedlam, presents a platform thick with sociopolitical references and philosophical inquiries. The exhibition considers the archive as a central framework: a rigorously organized selection of black and white newspaper photographs that Gaillard has mined from regional American press archives of the Baltimore Sun, the Washington Post, Cleveland's Plain Dealer and the Chicago Tribune. The original silver gelatin prints from these historic archives have become available to the public as these journals have begun to digitize their image collections, through which Gaillard has searched over the last several years. Investigative reporters' and photojournalists' documentations of the aftermath of disorderly situations and disasters, both natural and manmade, at first appear as fully intact archetypes, but closer inspection of these images reveal layers of interference, such as editor cropping notes, masking, creases and other marks, that mimic the physical subversion of the subject matter depicted therein. The archive is arranged as a network presented in uniform frames, united by the application of the artist's re-appropriated insignia of "Chief Wahoo," the red-faced icon of the Cleveland Indians baseball team, to each image. Gaillard's fast, almost reckless application of the cartoon motif to these calamitous scenes seeks to reposition and reclaim the identity of the laughing mascot by pairing it with images of civilization in states of ostensible disarray, driving home the brutal fact of accident, eradication and morality. Exhibited alongside the structural photographic compositions are frottages - rubbings pulled from manhole covers found in roads and sidewalks across the globe. The oversized works on paper crudely track Gaillard's extensive inner-city treks and feature his own handprints and knee impressions as he works quickly on site, employing graphite against iron plate. Onto the same sheets of paper that have traversed the various continents, Gaillard rubs into existence the "GATES" - thresholds to the underground world of sewers, gutters and drains uniting cities as diverse as Louisville, Kentucky or Washington DC with Tehran. The double frottages are produced using that most basic of art mediums: graphite, a crystal ore rich not only in the tradition of art history but also technology and industry. Gaillard was born in Paris and lives and works in Berlin and New York. He has been the subject of solo exhibitions at a number of major international institutions, including: Julia Stoschek Collection in collaboration with K20 – Kunstsammlung Nordrhein-Westfalen, Düsseldorf; Hammer Museum, Los Angeles; MoMA PS1, New York; Fondazione Nicola Trussardi, Milan; Schinkel Pavillon, Berlin; Centre Georges Pompidou, Paris; Kunst-Werke Institute for Contemporary Art, Berlin; Museum für Moderne Kunst, Zollamt, Frankfurt am Main; and Kunsthalle Basel, Basel.

We are pleased to present an exhibition of new paintings by Los Angeles-based artist Michael Williams. This will be the artist's first exhibition with Gladstone Gallery in New York. Williams continues in the vein of recent digitally printed works but on a grander scale. While Williams enjoys the directness that comes from working digitally, he is also invested in the process of printing's implied challenge to the doctrine of painting. By designing the content of his paintings in the digital environment, Williams both rejects the expressionistic dictum that painting is a direct extension of the body and reinvents it for the 21st century through the terms of computerized experience. Williams is drawn to the sort of painterly impasse presented by the material and connotational conflicts of oil painting vs. computer printing. Blending drawn lines, stretched agglomerations of form, and translucent scrims of paint along the printed surface, Williams' paintings situate us on an unlikely border between the familiar and the indecipherable. Williams' work is simultaneously pluralistic and conceptual, extending and interrupting modernist formalism while assimilating the ironies and contradictions of daily life. The familiarity of his vocabulary in these paintings—houses, computers, spaceship interiors, the "COEXIST" symbol, and tubes of paint—is filtered through the artist's wry sense of humor, ultimately achieving a reasoned entropy. Michael Williams was born in 1978 in Doylestown, Pennsylvania. In April 2017, Williams will be the subject of a major solo exhibition at The Carnegie Museum of Art in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. Williams has exhibited his work at venues and institutions including: Secession, Vienna; the Museum of Modern Art, New York; Dallas Museum of Art, Dallas, Texas; Wexner Center for the Arts, Columbus, Ohio; Ballroom Marfa, Marfa, Texas; and the Garage Center for Contemporary Culture, Moscow. In 2015, Williams held his first solo museum exhibition at Musée des Beaux-Arts de Montreal in Montreal, Canada.

We are pleased to present an exhibition of historical works realized by Italian artist Mimmo Rotella from 1953 to 1961. Representing a sea change in the artist's practice, the compositions on view are some of the first examples of Rotella's pioneering décollage and retro d'affiche techniques, methods that would become integral to Rotella's artistic pursuit of continually engaging with mass media's own promotional materials. Following his return to Rome from a residency at Kansas City University in 1952, Rotella consciously abandoned abstract painting as his primary form of expression. Stirred by the presence of movie and advertising posters around the city – and inspired by a cadre of other artists in the Italian capital at this time, such as Alberto Burri, Robert Rauschenberg, Salvatore Scarpitta, and Cy Twombly – Rotella began to rip banners and placards from walls and utilize them as the source material for his now-notorious assemblages. These works take two distinct forms: in the décollages, Rotella piled and glued advertisements face-up before tearing away and incising individual layers, thereby creating intentional and accidental expressionist juxtapositions of bold words, pop cultural images, and various hues. By contrast, the artist's retro d'affiches, using only the posters' often-untouched versos, showcase a concern with materiality à la Art Informel, as evidenced by the visible traces of glue, rust, plaster, and dust present in these compositions. Hardly a veneration of popular tastes, Rotella's works collapse any semblance of cultural hierarchy onto itself. Famous actors and consumer products all receive equal billing in the artist's arrangements. Similar to his American Pop Art counterparts, Rotella's excavation of wide-ranging social figures roots the décollages in the time of their creation, while simultaneously underscoring the ephemerality of the present moment. Mimmo Rotella was born in 1918 in Catanzaro, Italy, and passed away in 2006 in Milan. Over the course of his career, Rotella was the subject of solo and group exhibitions at many international institutions, including: Institute of Contemporary Arts, London; Musée d'Art Moderne et Contemporain, Nice; Musée Tinguely, Basel; Kunsthaus Zürich; Palazzo Grassi, Venice; and Palazzo Reale, Milan. Rotella's works are held in numerous prominent public collections worldwide, including: Galleria Nazionale d'Arte Monderna e Contemporanea, Rome; Galleria Civica di Arte Moderna e Contemporanea, Turin; Centre Georges Pompidou, Paris; De Menil Collection, Houston; Museum Moderner Kunst Stiftung Ludwig, Vienna; National Gallery of Art, Washington D.C.; Staatgalerie, Stuttgart, Germany; and Tate Gallery, London. This exhibition is realized in collaboration with the Mimmo Rotella Institute. Established in 2012 by Inna and Aghnessa Rotella, the Institute aims to promote and preserve the art of Mimmo Rotella both in Italy and abroad. Rotella's heirs appointed Germano Celant to edit the artist's multi-volume catalogue raisonné, of which the first volume was recently published. In conjunction with the exhibition, Gladstone Gallery has published a catalogue with essays by Antonella Soldaini and Veronica Locatelli, both of the Mimmo Rotella Institute.

We are pleased to present an exhibition of historical work by Andrew Lord. Long known for his sculpture in ceramic, Lord's work continually challenges the expectations of the medium as he seeks to mold in clay works that trace the haptic experience of his own senses and experiences. In 1978, Lord created a body of work whose shapes and surfaces were based on the fall of light onto different shaped maquettes. As if drawing from life, or painting a landscape en plein air, this process recorded his observations in three dimensions. By 1979, he began to think of these groups of maquettes as works in themselves and showed them in an exhibition with Art & Project in Amsterdam. With these pieces Lord found ceramics' ability to take on the commanding dimensions of painting. Emerging out of this practice, Thirty Pieces. Sorrow. (for T), (1996) incorporated various vessel-like sculptures, and two ceramic maps (one of Manhattan and another of the United States) across which he wrote the title from one side to the other, as if stretching the expanse from east to west. During the AIDS epidemic in New York City, Lord made several works that had their source in death and illness; with this work he applied emotion to the vocabulary of shapes, making them affectively, as well as formally, resonant. While the color of the thirty composing pieces may evoke mourning and funeral pomp, black is also a color that absorbs all light—everything—giving him a place for the variety and complexity of his feelings. From Sorrow came a series of related sculptures: biting, in which Lord bit into the surface of the clay, breathing, which he molded against his chest, smelling, an impression made by his nose and nostrils, tasting, made by his tongue, listening, his ear, swallowing, pressed against his neck. These vessels became a compendium of his senses and embodiment. After his practice of tracing light on maquettes, these works manifest his experiences directly: "I discovered in making a work with sorrow, the work becomes sorrow and stands for that emotion, just as a work about breathing, made by pressing clay against my chest, can become breathing." For Lord, "Sorrow marked a turning point because it was the moment emotions, the body, objects, places and memory became central, and I discovered anything could be subject matter. My work became about things identifiably personal, corporeal and autobiographical." The exhibition is organized in collaboration with the Kröller-Müller Museum in Otterlo to mark the occasion of Andrew Lord's gift in honor of Adriaan van Ravesteijn and Geert van Beijeren, founders of Art & Project (1968-2001) in Amsterdam and Slootdorp. Andrew Lord was born in 1950 in Rochdale, England, is based in New York City and also works in Europe. His work has been the subject of numerous solo exhibitions at international institutions including The Carnegie Museum of Art, Pittsburgh; Camden Arts Center, London; Rijksmuseum Twenthe, Enschede; Milton Keynes Gallery, England; and Santa Monica Museum of Art, Santa Monica. He has also been included in group exhibitions including: "Atelier 15," Stedelijk Museum, Amsterdam; "Westkunst. Heute," Museen der Stadt, Köln; "Anderer Leute Kunst," Museum Haus Lange, Krefeld; the 1995 Whitney Biennial; "Site and Insight," MoMA PS1, New York; "The Third Mind," Palais de Tokyo; and "Artists and Poets," Secession, Vienna. In 2014 Andrew Lord was resident of the Cité International des Arts Paris; in 2015 he participated in the Royal Academy of Arts Summer Exhibition. In the Fall of 2017 an exhibition of bronze sculptures will be presented on the Bluhm Family Terrace of The Art Institute of Chicago.

We are pleased to present an exhibition of new work by Wangechi Mutu. The title for this exhibition comes from the Gikuyu words for mud and trees, the prima materia for this body of work. Expanding her sculptural practice, this installation proposes an alternative to the systemic modes of representation in both Western and Eastern traditions by reimagining and recontextualizing the relations between the body, the natural world, and social forces. Well known for collages of hybrid forms drawn from folklore, popular culture, and art history, this new work marks an evolution in Mutu's critique of the construction of self-image. The complex texture and form that these figures offer prompt inquiry into the relationship between human existence and environment, producing interactions both intimate and challenging. Mutu transforms the gallery space into a terrestrial cosmology that spans the microscopic to the mythic. Drawn from the dirt and brush in areas around her studio, she conjures a world replete with chimerical paradox. Faces of women, ornamental footwear, and patterned spheres evoking viruses emerge from natural materials that elaborate on the traditions of makonde carving. Embracing the raw physicality of her surroundings, she mobilizes the earth as a continuation of her own complex intersectional identity and artistic query. Adding gravity to these roughhewn totems, each invokes the psychic and social struggle for control over bodies through capitalism, the fetish, and disease. Seating of grey blankets grounds the installation, inviting audiences "to enter a place and re-think themselves." This environment sets the stage for two new cast bronze sculptures that directly confront the myths of representation. A large-scale sculpture of an nguva, a water-woman of East African folklore, is at once familiar and otherworldly. Based on the transformation of the aquatic dugong, an herbivore closely related to the manatee, into the siren of superstition, Mutu staves off the disappearance of biological diversity and traditions of mythmaking by coalescing what she calls "the cross-pollination of ideas" into objects of desire. In another work, Second Dreamer (2016), she challenges the stasis of the bust and the appropriation of African masks through a self-portrait that captures the potential of psychic life. In this way, Mutu's sculpture acts as a corrective to a violent cultural consciousness, while offering an alternative narrative of embodiment and being in the world. Born in Nairobi, Kenya, Wangechi Mutu received her MFA from Yale University. Her work has been the subject of numerous solo shows, including, "Wangechi Mutu: A Fantastic Journey", which traveled to: Brooklyn Museum, New York; Nasher Museum of Art, Durham, North Carolina; Museum of Contemporary Art North Miami; and Block Museum, Evanston, Illinois. Other solo exhibitions include: SITE, Santa Fe; Museum of Contemporary Art, Sydney; Musée d'Art Contemporain de Montréal; Deutsche Guggenheim, Berlin; Wiels Center for Contemporary Art, Brussels; Art Gallery of Ontario; Museum of Contemporary Art, San Diego; Kunsthalle Wien; and San Francisco Museum of Modern Art. Mutu is the recipient of Deutsche Bank's "Artist of the Year" award, the Louis Comfort Tiffany Foundation Grant, the Joan Mitchell Foundation Painters & Sculptors Award, and the American Federation of Arts' Leadership Award. In the coming year, Mutu will present solo exhibitions at Museum Dhondt-Dhaenens, Deurle, Belgium and The Contemporary Austin, Texas.

The dogs, moved by old memory, still lift their hindlegs at a once-familiar spot. The church's walls have long since been torn down, but these dogs see the church walls in their dreams. Dog-dreams have canceled out reality … For them the church still stands; they see it plain. — Joseph Brodsky, from "A Halt in the Desert" We are pleased to present an installation of new paintings by Andro Wekua. Through a practice that includes film, sculpture, and collage, Wekua works in the ambiguous half-light of memory, fantasy, and history. He offers fragmented narratives, part objects, and doubled figures as meta-fictions of a self that skid against autobiographical and historical specificity. Building from the collage practice that has been central to his work, Wekua presents a new body of portraits and seascapes inspired by the numinous presence of the icon. As the image of a body formed of myth, as well as personal history, these portrayals of people and places from the artist's life emerge from the accreted layers of both formal and psychic investigation. On aluminum panels, re-worked through a process that continually adds and removes oil paint to construct new figures and relations, the artist collages and draws his way through different registers of meaning by obscuring, refashioning, or even completely effacing the original source image. The exhibition includes large painterly tableaus, redolent of European landscape and seascape painting, which, in wrestling spatial relations of figure and ground, convey the aesthetic process as a dive into fiction as reality. Andro Wekua was born in 1977 in Georgia, and studied visual arts there and in Basel, Switzerland. In 2016 his work was the subject of a solo exhibition at Kölnischer Kunstverein. Other solo museum exhibitions include Kunsthalle Wien, Austria; Kunsthalle Fridericianum, Kassel, Germany; Castello di Rivoli, Turin, Italy; Wiels, Brussels, Belgium, Neue Kunst Halle, St. Gallen, Switzerland; Kunstmuseum Winterthur, Switzerland; Museum Boijmans van Beuningen, Rotterdam, Netherlands; Camden Arts Center, London; the De Haalen Haarlem, Netherlands; Le Magasin, Grenoble, France; and the Benaki Museum, Athens, Greece. He has participated in various group shows including ILLUMInations at the 54th Venice Biennale (2011), Contemplating the Void at the Guggenheim Museum in New York (2010), 10,000 Lives, 8th Gwangju Biennale, South Korea (2010), Life on Mars: 55th Carnegie International, Carnegie Museum of Art, Pittsburgh, and the 4th Berlin Biennial (2006).

"The objects can adapt to the circumstances that develop around them. I believe beauty allows me to refer to content rather than explain it. It might last longer that way." — Kasper Bosmans We are pleased to present Model Garden, the gallery's first exhibition of works by Kasper Bosmans. In a suite of new paintings and objects, the artist presents a distinct visual language through graphic appropriation and the deployment of historical, political, and artistic signs. Bosmans works as a careful gatherer of material culled from cultural memories (folk art, heraldry, maps, legends, alphabets and symbols) that were once common and close to home in his native Belgium. Research into pictorial codes acts as a point of departure as Bosmans systematically transposes acquired knowledge into Legends, small-scale paintings in which encyclopedic and mythological anecdotes coexist in stylized forms. Through these recognizable symbols painted in bold forms and with stark lines, the viewer is invited to "read" the paintings–as opposed to "view"– as one would a map. Formal elements and ideologies intrinsic to the studied phenomena open up a realm of meaning that both surpasses and celebrates their original functions. Every thread of investigation is incorporated into Bosman's unique visual language and further translated into paintings and sculptural ensembles. Kasper Bosmans (b. 1990) lives and works in Brussels and Amsterdam. Recent exhibitions include: Decorations at Witte de With Centre for Contemporary Art, Rotterdam; Specimen Days, S.M.A.K., Ghent (2016); Loot, Soil, and Cleanliness, CIAP, Hasselt (2016); Motif (Oil and Silver), Marc Foxx Gallery, Los Angeles (2016); Yesterday was different with Marthe Ramm Fortun, KOMPLOT, Brussels (2015); Des hôtes: a foreigner, a human, an unexpected visitor, Spring Workshop, Hong Kong (2015); Little Cherry Virus, P/////akt, Amsterdam (2015); Un-Scene III, Wiels, Brussels (2015); Het kanaal - le canal, Extra City Kunsthal, Antwerp & Espace 251 Nord, Liège (2014); Coming People, S.M.A.K., Ghent (2014).

We are pleased to present I dreamed a world and called it Love., an exhibition of new works by Jim Hodges. Jim Hodges' engagement with mirrored glass as a material originated in the mid 1990's, with a single cracked panel mounted on raw canvas. So began a progression that has seen its employ through hand-cut mosaic series to milled camouflage motifs as stand-alone structural forms. An invested concentration in surface reflectivity as its own medium is present in much of Hodges' work–glass, gold and polished stainless steel–and allows for multiple readings, broadening experiential possibilities and disrupting notions of a fixed site. I dreamed a world and called it Love. materializes simultaneously as a single panorama, made up of numerous individual monochromes as well as multi-colored patterned panels. Unprecedented in size, the installation offers an immersive inversion of the painting experience, along with an opportunity for reflection–literal and philosophical–in an exhilarating and undetermined environment. Jim Hodges was born in 1957 in Spokane, Washington, and lives and works in New York. His work has been the subject of numerous solo exhibitions at institutions including: the Centre Georges Pompidou, Paris; Camden Art Centre, London; the Aspen Art Museum; CGAC, Santiago de Compostela, Spain; Tang Teaching Museum and Art Gallery at Skidmore College, Saratoga Springs, New York; and the Museum of Contemporary Art, Chicago. Most recently a major traveling retrospective of Hodges's work was exhibited at the Institute of Contemporary Art, Boston; Walker Art Center, Minneapolis; the Dallas Museum of Art; and the Hammer Museum, Los Angeles. Hodges has received multiple awards and grants including the Association International des Critiques d'art, the Albert Ucross Prize, Washington State Arts Commission, and the Penny McCall Foundation Grant. Video I dreamed a world and called it Love. ● ● ● Copyright Jim Hodges

Gladstone Gallery, in collaboration with Fondazione Merz, is pleased to present an exhibition of historic early works by Mario Merz. A leading member of Italy's Arte Povera movement of the 1960s and 70s, Merz created paintings, sculptures, and installations with an aim to oppose a monolithic culture and to celebrate perplexity. This goal manifested itself in the artist's deviation from the mass-media iconography popularized by Pop Art, the mythic emotionalism of Abstract Expressionism, and the machismo detachment of Minimalism. Instead, Merz and his Arte Povera contemporaries – such as Alighiero e Boetti, Luciano Fabro, and Jannis Kounellis, among others – employed simple, everyday materials and perceptive references to nature in order to ground their art in a relatable existential ambiguity. The three seminal works on view in this exhibition exemplify this stratagem. Giap Igloo – If the Enemy Masses His Forces, He Loses Ground: If He Scatters, He Loses Strength (1968) represents a body of work that became an enduring motif throughout Merz's career, since he began making igloo sculptures in 1967. Using the exterior world to create an interior space, igloos encapsulate Merz's drive to utilize social tradition as a means for individual reflection. At once a freestanding structure, this hemisphere is rendered meaningless without an inhabitant to provide utilitarian import. The instillation of subjective weight onto the objective form of the igloo is underscored by the neon words circumscribing the dome. A quotation from General Vo Nguyen Giap of the Vietnamese National Liberation Front describing the double-bind of combat strategy, the glowing letters provide a visual tension to the cracking clay exterior, while highlighting the artist's fascination with social mores – in this case, military and political custom. Further showcasing Merz's interest in exploring a collective conscience through prosaic media is his boxlike sculpture, Sitin (1968). The title of the work invokes the physical act of using one's body to occupy space – a fact emphasized by the position of the sculpture on the gallery's floor – and also points to the global escalation of political protests in 1968, of which the sit-in was an often-used technique. Through this gesture, Merz emphasizes the social significance of sitting as individual stance and collective action. The large-scale installation, La bottiglia di Leyda (Leyden Jar), provides a visual culmination of Merz's Arte Povera endeavors: physical space is redefined as both deeply personal and simultaneously universal through the use of common materials. With wire mesh covering every wall of the gallery, Merz invites viewers into a communal environment that proudly incorporates the natural world, all while neon lights spell out the Fibonacci sequence. A remarkable numeric sequence that seems to exist throughout nature (from pinecones to snail shells), the Fibonacci numbers in this work stress a belief that, even though the world around us is sometimes inexplicable and chaotic, there is an order uniting us all. Mario Merz was born in 1925 and died in 2003 in Milan, Italy. He was awarded the Praemium Imperiale, Tokyo; the Oskar Kokoschka Prize, Vienna; and the Arnold Bode Prize, Kassel. Merz was the subject of numerous solo exhibitions at institutions around the world, including Fundação de Serralves, Porto; Welhelm Lehmbruck Museum, Duisberg; Fundación Antoni Tàpies, Barcelona; and Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, New York. His work is included in many prominent public collections, including Centre Georges Pompidou, Paris; Hirshhorn Museum and Sculpture Garden, Washington D.C.; The Museum of Modern Art, New York; Stedelijk Museum, Amsterdam; Walker Art Center, Minneapolis; and the Art Institute of Chicago, among many others. The Fondazione Merz in Turin, Italy, regularly displays both the works of its namesake and sponsors exhibitions by living artists.

Gladstone 64 is pleased to present SPEED POWER TIME HEART, an exhibition of new paintings by Elizabeth Peyton. This show will be Peyton's first exhibition with Gladstone Gallery in New York. "Dark Incandescence," Peyton's 2014 exhibition at Gladstone Gallery, Brussels, marked the latter part of a five-year creative interval surveyed in a monograph of the same title forthcoming from Rizzoli. Together with Peyton's first Gladstone Brussels exhibition in 2009, these two shows serve as bookends to the period chronicled in the publication. "Dark Incandescence" refers to Gustave Flaubert's writings from Flaubert in Egypt. Kirsty Bell, whose essay is included in the book, observes that Flaubert renders the most ordinary details of bourgeois life extraordinary through his powers of perception and description, which has had a deep impact on Peyton. Concurrently, Peyton's exhibition, "Tristan und Isolde," is on view at the Gallery Met at the Metropolitan Opera through November 26th. Bell writes: "Her work is charged with a vital sense of proximity, regardless of whether the subject is a living face, a photograph, a vase of flowers or the dramatic denouement of Wagner's Tristan and Isolde. It is all about the present moment. Seen together, however, her work offers a complex meditation on the nature of time and creative potential." Elizabeth Peyton was born in 1965 and currently lives and works in New York. Her work has been exhibited extensively in international galleries and museums, and is in leading public collections, including the Guggenheim Museum, New York; Museum of Modern Art, New York; Centre Georges Pompidou, Paris; San Francisco Museum of Modern Art; Kunstmuseum, Wolfsburg; Walker Art Center, Minneapolis; Museum of Contemporary Art, Los Angeles; Tate Modern, London; and the Whitney Museum of American Art, New York. An acclaimed mid-career retrospective, "Live Forever," was organized by the New Museum of Contemporary Art, New York, in 2008; the exhibition later traveled to the Walker Art Center, Minneapolis; Whitechapel Gallery, London; and Bonnefantenmuseum, Maastricht. Recent solo exhibitions include: Staatliche Kunsthalle Baden-Baden; Gallery Met, New York; and the Irish Museum of Modern Art, Dublin. In 2017, solo exhibitions will be held at Hara Museum, Tokyo, and Académie de France in Rome - Villa Medici.

Gladstone Gallery Brussels is pleased to exhibit new works in textile and ceramic by Damián Ortega. Beginning his career as a political cartoonist, Ortega has a longstanding interest in teasing out the underlying social and political narratives embedded in even the most commonplace materials. Fascinated by systems of construction and distribution, he analyzes the formal relationship between individual parts and their larger whole by deconstructing familiar objects to create new spatial arrangements and enabling each component to be analyzed and reconsidered. Creating works that are at once playful and deeply provocative, Ortega investigates the way things come apart, yet remain fundamentally connected. With this exhibition, Ortega will show a new body of textiles for the first time. In development for over two years, the artist collaborated with different work shops in Mexico City, Oaxaca, and San luis de la Paz, Guanajuato, all of whom incorporate wildly differing materials and techniques. This suite reveals systems in both process and form: Through a range of subjects, from the human body, to microchips, to maps, Ortega elucidates processes of interconnection by creating reticles and grids. These textiles depict complex amalgams of the temporal, spatial, historical imagery, both representational and abstract. The artist writes, "I have been experimenting with ways of measuring time through weavings…textiles are marked by amounts of work, and the time of the work being done is also marked by the body's rhythm. Some of my textiles are a system for measuring time, something of a music score, a calendar or a code." In addition, Ortega will exhibit a new body of ceramic work that remarks on his interest in craft and the traditions of popular folk culture, including rows of baked brick with serpentine forms interrupting or uniting the grid and aerial topographic maps in circular flats of clay. In a particular grouping of fired clay sculptures, Ortega recreates dried ears of corn to explore complex systems of biodiversity, tracing how random patterns of genetics color individual kernels differently. These intricate designs marked on the ear of corn become an unknown code, transforming common agriculture into a form of technology and the medium of codified information. Damián Ortega was born in 1967 in Mexico and currently lives and works in Mexico City and Berlin. He has had solo exhibitions at notable international venues including: Museo Reina-Sofia, Madrid; Museu de Arte Moderna do Rio de Janeiro; HangarBicocca, Milan; Museo Jumex, Mexico City; The Cleveland Museum of Art; the Barbican, London; the Institute of Contemporary Art, Boston; Tate Modern, London; Kunsthalle Basel; Institute of Contemporary Art, Philadelphia; and Centre Pompidou, Paris. Ortega participated in the 55th Venice Biennale (2013); the 27th São Paulo Biennial (2006); the 4th Berlin Biennial (2006); and the 50th Venice Biennale (2003). His work is currently on view through October at the Fruitmarket Gallery, Edinburgh, and in "El cohete y el abismo" at Palacio de Cristal-Museo Reina Sofia, Madrid.

We are pleased to present the sun at 4pm, an exhibition that continues Ugo Rondinone's decades-long examination of the link between the natural world and the human condition. Extending the artist's mining of the German Romantic movement, and particularly Caspar David Friedrich, as a primary source of reference, the four distinct bodies of work on view – mountain, sun, waterfall, and cloud – present a setting wherein the commonplace of the everyday gives way to the sublimity of environmental phenomena. In formations that immediately call to mind rock spire outcroppings, or "hoodoo," endemic to the Badlands of North America, Rondinone's mountain sculptures consist of rocks vertically stacked on concrete plinths of varying sizes. Austere in their reference to Minimalist composition and titling, the artist mitigates severity in both the Day-Glo coloring of the boulders, as well as the deferential nod to the tradition of stone stacking, a practice seen from prehistoric dolmens to contemporary cairns. In these gestures, Rondinone extends the specificity of art history to a universality gleaned from cult objects that exist worldwide. It is this ability to meld the romanticism of the individual into the transcendence of the metaphysical that ties together all works in the exhibition. Forever preserved in a state of precariousness, the mountain sculptures also manifest a suspension of time. This notion of temporality carries over to Rondinone's new series of sculptures, sun. Composed of branches cast in aluminum and then gilded, the world's oldest gauge of time is rendered static. As the exhibition's poetic title indicates, this interior presentation of an exterior natural occurrence calls into question not only our conception of time's passage, but also the ways in which society turns nature into artificial intervals. In the same breath, by fashioning abstracted solar forms from the branches of real-life trees, Rondinone venerates the quotidian world as nothing short of extraordinary. Modeled by hand in clay and cast in aluminum, the spiraling waterfall works seem to simultaneously collapse downwards and expand upwards, creating a visual tension between gravity and ethereality. The cloud canvases capture a similar paradox, in which the painted abstract surface points to an infinite celestial world beyond the gallery's walls, but the cartoon-like borders root the works in an unambiguous literalism. By rendering such incongruity through beautiful visual means, Rondinone sets the stage for an existential reflection on artificial versus natural, banal versus sublime. Ugo Rondinone was born in 1964 in Brunnen, Switzerland and currently lives and works in New York. Rondinone has been the subject of recent solo exhibitions at institutions including: MACRO and Mercati di Traiano, Rome; The Institute of Contemporary Art, Boston; Carré d'Art, Nîmes, France; Museum Boijmans van Beuningen, Rotterdam; Museum Anahuacalli, Mexico City; Rockbund Art Museum, Shanghai; M Museum, Leuven, Belgium; Museum of Cycladic Art, Athens; Kunsthistorisches Museum Wien, Vienna; and Museum Dhondt-Dhaenens, Deurle, Belgium. This past May, Rondinone's large-scale public work seven magic mountains opened outside Las Vegas, co-produced by the Art Production Fund and Nevada Museum of Art, and in the coming year, solo exhibitions of the artist will be held at Place Vendome, Paris; Bass Museum of Art, Miami; Contemporary Arts Center, Cincinnati; and Berkeley Art Museum in California.

Gladstone 64 is pleased to announce an exhibition of early drawings by Carroll Dunham. Featuring a large group of drawings created between 1982 and 1996, the exhibition highlights a period of Dunham's practice in which he exploredthe boundaries of, and possibilities within abstraction. Preceding the figurative painting for which Dunham is so well known, this body of work exemplifies Dunham's fruitful period of gesture and abstraction. Demonstrating both the range and inventiveness of his drawing practice, Dunham experimented with drawing on paper, wood and papyrus, with charcoals, inks, wax crayon, casein paints, pencils and pastels. Throughout his career, Dunham has drawn no distinction between the acts of painting and drawing. As noted by theartist, the practices of drawing and painting run parallel: "The only material distinction between what I was calling paintings and what I was calling drawings," he says, "is that my drawings were not mounted on panel." Treating drawing as a medium for experimentation, Dunham removed all traces of what he termed the "age of rectangles" from his drawings made between 1982 and 1984, eliminating linear progress and grids in favor of abstraction. Through biomorphic shapes, flourishes of graphite, black paint and white gesso, Dunham pursued a new aesthetic language of nonrepresentational forms derived from "information not available through logic." In Untitled (3/15/84), for instance, one of his last works drawn on a wooden surface, Dunham extrapolated shape from the veneer of the wood,using the curves of the grain to determine composition, tracing a path in black until a knot explodes into a burst of white paint. The mid-to-late 1980s brought new transformations succeeding a series of surface experiments he conducted while working with multiple types of paper. Two examples on view come from the seminal 1988 series, Nine Drawings. In these works, Dunham focuses on a single colored object that seems to hover on the expansive space of the white page. Exuberant forms executed in thick yellow, black and orange crayon are tempered by delicate pencil strokes. The distinctive gestures act as both form and subject. Dunham's application of crayon to the page differs with visible use of pressure—gestures of what appear to be the dense marks of the artist digging into the page are juxtaposed with evenly applied ink lines swirling with the same velocity as crosshatched pencil lines. Works from 1988 and 1989 further explore the amorphous central shape, highlighting fresh discoveries in the use of positive and negative space. At times Dunham's marks arrive at semi-definable shapes, yet just as often are delivered as marks in space. Untitled (5/14/89 features an amorphous yet puzzle-like form, outlined in pencil with striated contours filled with swathes of pink. Sketched outlines reveal hints of cartoon eyes, teeth and genitalia while oblong plateaus, dense foliage-like curlicues and craters recall otherworldly topographies. A suite of drawings from 1990 collapses the space between shape and background. In Untitled (5/12/90), contours are carefully delineated, shifting the shape further into the realm of the figurative, while limb-like forms jut out of a landscape dotted with clumps of hair, leopard spots, genitalia, and octopus-like suction cups. Drawings through 1996, notably, Pink Mound with Eruption (5/18/93, 5/19/93), exhibit further refinement and expansion into figurative detail with lively strokes of animated color. Motifs emerge and protrude from the central shape while still maintaining an unnamable quality. Dexterously moving between the representational and the non-representational, Dunham's "pink mounds" read as planetoids, colored in quick blush-toned gestures bringing to mind a glimpse into a particle accelerator. In these animated, biomorphic blurs of color, the viewer can begin to see the fertile ground fromwhich Dunham's later representational works spring. A forthcoming catalogue entitled, Carroll Dunham: Drawings 1982-96, will accompany the exhibition. Carroll Dunham was born in 1949 and lives and works in New York and Connecticut. Dunham's work has been the subject of numerous solo exhibitions at international institutions including Museum Ludwig, Cologne; Millesgården, Stockholm; Drammens Museum, Drammen, Norway; a mid-career retrospective was held at the New Museum of Contemporary Art,New York. Dunham has also been included in notable group exhibitions including multiple Whitney Biennials and SITE Santa Fe; and at institutions including Musée d'art moderne et contemporain, Geneva; the Museum of Modern Art, New York; Museu Picasso, Barcelona; The Institute of Contemporary Art, Boston.

Gladstone Gallery in Brussels is pleased to present a group exhibition featuring works by Lynn Hershman Leeson, Cameron Jamie, Marisa Merz, Elizabeth Peyton, Jack Smith, Rosemarie Trockel, and Andro Wekua. Taking its title from a collection of essays by Jack Smith, "Wait for Me at the Bottom of the Pool" presents works centering on the concept of identity and the murky waters in which fact and fiction are mixed to allow propositions and experiments for new identities to emerge. The exhibited artists posit questions of subjectivity in a range of media, evincing the possibility of a realm in which reality can be both evaded and even submerged. The "bottom of the pool" can be likened to what critic Northrop Fry termed as the "green world"—a more loosely structured, illusory realm in which protagonists can subvert the confining codes of identity of the "real world," thus facilitating a new, more germane present. In both his art and life, Jack Smith sought to transfuse styles, mediums, materials, and particularly bodies, transcending norms to create filmic counter-cultures. In an untitled, undated crayon drawing, Smith places two figures swinging from a vine in the center of the page. Against a kaleidoscopic jungle-like background, the two figures appear both naked and in mid-flight. Permanently suspended in a fantastical state of escape to the unknown, the flagrantly nude figures express new possibilities of an eroticism that is beyond the reach of identity and representation. Sixteen collages, photographs, and drawings conveying Smith's unique sensibility will be on view. In a suite of works by Lynn Hershman Leeson from 1974—78, the artist puts forth the persona of Roberta Breitmore, a fictional female identity that entered into exchange with real life. The Roberta Breitmore series was thus staged as an interactive portrait performance that anticipated the proliferation of surrogate identities and avatars that flourished in the digital era several decades later. Rosemarie Trockel substitutes iconographic, linguistic and material transformations with the expected guises of identity and representation. Trockel has consistently resisted an explicit stylistic signature, though certain recurring themes weave throughout her oeuvre, most notably notions of female identity and the varying presence or anonymity of the artist traceable in a physical object. Through his photographs and sculptures, Andro Wekua pieces together fragmented fictions, pictorially representing no-where worlds of mystery and intrigue. In two striking works on view, Wekua asks the viewer to consider where both individual and collective memory are born from and reside. Through collage and the layering of color, the artist forces the viewer to consider which elements of the image belong to fiction. Elizabeth Peyton is best known for her portraits of artists, musicians, historical figures, and occasional athletes, cityscapes, and still lifes, which she renders from photographs and from life. This exhibition includes three photographs from 2014 and 2015. Peyton's insights into historical and artistic portraiture transform her subjects into work that is both reminiscent of the everyday and beautifully transcendent. Cameron Jamie's practice ranges from drawings to sculptural objects to films that explore the notion of portraiture, self-representation, and collective identity. His films and sculptures are often described as a form of anthropological investigation into the way we view ourselves and the world at large. His ceramic sculptures are formed from organic and hand-molded clay, which is repeatedly fired and glazed, creating a glossed animated surface pattern of swirling lava varnishes. The work of Marisa Merz displays an interest in flowing, organic forms, a concentration on subjectivity and the visionary, the embrace of arte povera's "low" materials and craft techniques, emphasizing the relationship between art and life. Throughout Merz's oeuvre, the figure of the face emerges at times in arabesque lines of graphite, or radiant gold leaf, or molded from clay. Each reveals a ghostly configuration of abstracted features that defy expressions of individual identity, fixing each form in a state of suspended time.

We are pleased to present Facility of DECLINE, an exhibition of early works from Matthew Barney's 1991 New York debut at the gallery's former SoHo location. Marking a continued collaboration between the artist and gallery, key sculptures, videos, and drawings from the series will be reunited for the first time in twenty-five years. In a presentation that mirrors the original moment, but does not replicate it, Barney's works transform complex personal and historical narratives into sculptural objects, employing an unusual range of materials pioneered by the artist: petroleum jelly, prosthetic plastic, tapioca, and cast sucrose. In October 1991, two filmed actions, BLIND PERINEUM and RADIAL DRILL, were performed by Barney, on-site at the gallery. These videos set the stage for an elaborate narrative featuring Oakland Raider Jim Otto, and the escape artist Harry Houdini, a story line that incorporates the two sculptures, REPRESSIA and TRANSEXUALIS , which bookend the exhibition. The climbing path featured in those pivotal early videos is recreated in the Chelsea gallery forming a guide through the sculptures, including for the first time in this configuration, DRILL TEAM: screw BOLUS, an expansive and intricate installation that occupies its own room. This large-scale work includes 44 cast petroleum wax and jelly dumbbells punctured with the same ice screws and carabiners Barney used to scale the gallery ceiling in BLIND PERINEUM. The exhibition is accompanied by Matthew Barney: OTTO Trilogy, an in-depth publication distributed by Yale University Press, that traces the progression of the artist's three most significant early projects: Facility of INCLINE, Facility of DECLINE, and OTTOshaft. An introduction by Nancy Spector, essay by cultural critic Maggie Nelson, and a new text by the artist offer a key to understanding major themes that appear throughout Barney's oeuvre. Matthew Barney was born in San Francisco in 1967 and lives and works in New York. Exhibitions include: Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, New York; Museum Ludwig, Cologne; Musée d'Art Moderne de la Ville de Paris; Museum for Contemporary Art, Kanazawa, Japan; Leeum Samsung Museum of Art, Seoul; San Francisco Museum of Modern Art; Serpentine Gallery, London; Kunsthalle Vienna, and Schaulager/Laurenz Foundation, Basel, Switzerland. Barney's most recent project, RIVER OF FUNDAMENT (2014), a six-hour operatic film, debuted in New York in 2014 and screenings continue internationally. The film and related body of sculptures were exhibited in 2014 at Haus der Kunst, Munich, and traveled to The Museum of Old and New Art, Tasmania, and the Museum of Contemporary Art, Los Angeles. Barney has received numerous awards including the Aperto prize at the 1993 Venice Biennale; the Hugo Boss Award in 1996; the 2007 Kaiser Ring Award in Goslar, Germany and the San Francisco International Film Festival's Persistence of Vision Award in 2011.

Can a mote of sunlight defeat its purpose When thought shows it to be deep or dark? See sun, and think shadow. - Louis Zukofsky, anew #21 We are pleased to announce See sun, and think shadow, a group exhibition organized by Simone Battisti. Featuring twelve artists working across varied media, this show will explore the formal tool of antithesis as it is manifest in works that run the gamut from video and installation, to painting and photography. The artists included in the exhibition are: Lucas Blalock, Liz Deschenes, Jessica Dickinson, Trisha Donnelly, Apostolos Georgiou, Hilary Lloyd, Shahryar Nashat, Blake Rayne, Nora Schultz, Amy Sillman, Diane Simpson, and Michael E. Smith. Borrowing its title from Louis Zukofsky's short poem, anew #21, the exhibition will use the binary of light/dark not as a thematic end goal, but rather as an allegorical springboard into broader dichotomies that emerge as a result of examining compositional contrariety, such as hope and despair, familiar and foreign, human and mechanical, and real and representational. The works on view provide visual rejoinders to this investigation. Lucas Blalock's highly constructed photographs obliterate distinctions between documentary and artifice through the artist's use of filmic and digital photographic techniques. Apostolos Georgiou's canvas, Untitled (2013), a composition in which narrative is just barely evident, utilizes figuration as an endeavor to upset the coherence of the picture plane. Hilary Lloyd's video, Sailor (2010), through its presentation of the title subject in sequential images, straddles the line between prosaic observation and overt voyeurism. Shahryar Nashat's installation, Present Sore (2016) – commissioned by the Walker Art Center, Minneapolis, and co-produced with Portikus, Frankfurt am Main – shows the body as a system of ready-at-hand tools in a format that mimics iPhone displays, thereby breaking down the boundaries between human and machine. Nora Schultz's oversized Venetian blinds, while functional, negate their purpose without a light source to block. Amy Sillman's animation, Triscuits (2011-2012), employs allusions to Bernie Boston's Flower Power, Yiddish aphorism, and Soviet-era poetry as means to drive her ghostly characters through cyclical moments of expulsion and insertion. And Diane Simpson's sculpture, an earth-toned tunic produced in rigid rectilinear form, renders utility null. By interrogating opposites, the featured works elucidate the differences between two poles, and, in the same breath, obscure any distinctions between two seemingly incongruous parts. However, this notion of incompatibility is not a paradox. Rather, it is a tool by which to interrogate uncertainty itself: How is duality ascertained? What is gained by establishing oppositional discourses? Do elements automatically reveal their own inverse?

We are pleased to announce an exhibition of recent work by Anish Kapoor taking place across both of the gallery's Chelsea locations. This two-part exhibition demonstrates Kapoor's ongoing exploration of the formal and conceptual framework that has informed his artistic practice for over three decades, bringing together the highly engineered and more organic processes within his oeuvre. The exhibition will feature a series of reliefs and paintings composed of tumultuous layers of red and white silicone and paint, as well as one monumental earth and resin sculpture on a marble pedestal. At once intimate, imposing, and refined, Kapoor's work dually confronts and expands conditions of matter, perception, and metaphor. "Internal Objects in Three Parts" (2013-15) is a three-panel relief in painted silicone and wax and was exhibited this year at the Rijksmuseum in "Anish Kapoor & Rembrandt." The reliefs appear visceral and daunting, reminiscent of mangled, bloody flesh-like forms. In these heavily layered paintings, Kapoor amplifies the material associations of the red malleable wax he has explored in depth in earlier mechanized installations such as "My Red Homeland" (2003), "Svayambh" (2005), and "Shooting into the Corner" (2009). In these panels the corporeal forms seethe with raw, vertiginous, lurching effect, as shapes come into form as both contingent matter and restless proposition. In Kapoor's syncretic practice, organic forms and materials are juxtaposed with polished, geometric sculptures that both expand and compress a viewer's sense of space. Both minimal and heavily worked surfaces prevail, as opposing forces retain and reflect light with resounding formal and phenomenological effect. Asking that the viewer become as much aware of the sculpture's shape and volume as his or her own bodily form is a touchstone of Kapoor's work. Anish Kapoor was born in 1954 in Bombay, India, and has lived and worked in London since 1973. Recent major solo exhibitions of his work have been presented at the Château de Versailles, Versailles; the Jewish Museum and Tolerance Center, Moscow; Sakıp Sabancı Museum, Istanbul; Martin Gropius Bau, Berlin; the Museum of Contemporary Art, Sydney; Le Grand Palais, Paris; National Gallery of Modern Art, New Delhi; Museo Guggenheim Bilbao, Bilbao; the Tate Modern, London; and Fondazione Prada, Milan. Kapoor received the Premio Duemila in 1990 for his British Pavilion at the 44th Venice Biennale and was awarded the Turner Prize in 1991; he was awarded a CBE in 2003 and a Knighthood in 2013 for dedication to visual arts.

We are pleased to present primordial, an exhibition of new works by Ugo Rondinone. Within the Brussels gallery space, Rondinone creates another universe with forty-seven sculptures: each form is named after a natural phenomenon and embodied by a bronze fish suspended on wire. These sculptures follow in a series that includes bronze-cast birds (primitive, 2011) and horses (primal, 2013). Rondinone's three groupings of animals stand in for the world beyond the exhibition space, representing the transience and temporality of the natural world. This menagerie of forms belonging to air, land, and water represents timeless occurrences within the cosmos while demonstrating infinite reincarnations. The notion of time is fundamental within Rondinone's work, reflected in his concept, process, and materials. The school of fish in primordial floats quietly and motionlessly unaffected by time. These forms, with titles such as the feather, the insect, or the gravity, serve as amulets of time suspended in mid-air, and provide a contemplative space where the past and present can coexist. For Rondinone, the process of making art is a ritual, and he commemorates the daily by producing one sculpture a day. Each fish begins in clay and the evidence of Rondinone's working process is preserved in the finished bronze, linking each sculpture to his own lifetime through the encapsulated gestures. While each of the forty-seven fish is unique, the fish bear a cohesion as they are covered with only Rondinone's fingerprints. This duality, along with contrasts between organic and inorganic, movement and stillness, as well as mass and weightlessness, present a disparity between the exterior and interior. Over the last decades, Rondinone has created a strikingly diverse body of work exploring conditions of human life and the transience of existence. His paintings range from large Arcadian landscapes to striped or radial gradients named after the dates when the works were completed. Rondinone's sculptures extend from small still-life objects to colossal bluestone figures. Ugo Rondinone was born in 1964 in Brunnen, Switzerland and currently lives and works in New York. Rondinone has been the subject of recent solo exhibitions at institutions including: Museum Boijmans van Beuningen, Rotterdam; Museum Anahuacalli, Mexico City; Rockbund Art Museum, Shanghai; Museum Leuven, Brussels; the Art Institute of Chicago; the Museum of Cycladic Art, Athens; Kunsthistorisches Museum Wien, Vienna; Museum Dhondt-Dhaenens, Deurle, Belgium; and Museo de Arte Contemporáneo de Castilla y León, Spain. Rondinone recently curated I ♥ John Giorno at Palais de Tokyo in Paris, and Artists and Poets at the Vienna Secession. Forthcoming solo exhibitions include: becoming soil, at Carre d'art, Nîmes, France; seven magic mountains, with Art Production Fund and Nevada Museum of Art; vocabolario della solitudine at MACRO, Rome; and Gladstone Gallery, New York, in September of this year.

We are pleased to announce the gallery's first exhibition with T. J. Wilcox. The show will present new film installations and lenticular photographic lightboxes, exploring the movement and mutation of cloudscapes as compelling abstracted narratives. In this installation, Wilcox leads viewers to look upward to the ceiling, an often-overlooked surface within the gallery space. Suggestive of the natural world beyond the enclosed built environment and beyond human stature, the assembled projections offer a view of the extraordinary, unpredictable, and the everyday experience of gazing upward at the sky. The artist has produced sculptures that hang from the ceiling at a single point, comprising an arrangement of steel, Plexiglas and projected video. These hanging sculptures suspend in balance a group of projection screens arranged to float overhead like a cluster of abstracted clouds. The screens are made of a new material that allows rear-projected video to brightly appear in high resolution in any light condition. Wilcox's structures engender awe for the enormity and phenomena of the natural world that often goes unnoticed; non-linear narratives concerning the act of looking upward interspersed in the films additionally offer further reflection on the world above our heads. The exhibition will also feature the artist's film of the sky as five lightboxes. Through lenticular printing, the act of animation is made physical as viewers perceive shifting clouds through phenomenological experience. In Wilcox's lightboxes and films, the expansive world is distilled without being simplified; what is too large to comprehend is put forth as an opportunity to imagine the atemporal and mythological world around us. T. J. Wilcox was born in 1965 in Seattle, Washington, and lives and works in New York. His work has been the subject of solo exhibitions at institutions including: the Whitney Museum of American Art, New York; Grand Rapids Art Museum, Michigan; Carthage Hall, Lismore Castle Arts, Waterford, Ireland; Stedelijk Museum, Amsterdam; and Kunstverein Munich, Munich. Wilcox has been included in group exhibitions at institutions including: the Museum of Modern Art, New York; Musee d'art et d'histoire, Geneva; Centro Galego De Arte Contemporánea, Santiago de Compostela, Spain; Kunstsammlung Nordrhein-Westfalen, Düsseldorf, Germany; Museum Ludwig, Cologne, Germany. His films have been screened at the Museum of Modern Art, New York, and the Tate Modern, London, and he participated in the 2015 Biennale de Lyon and the 2004 Whitney Biennial.

We are pleased to present the gallery's first exhibition with Michael Williams. The show will present a suite of new paintings, featuring further explorations of his puzzle paintings series and iterations of a figure featured in recent work. Williams is known for his richly colored, multi-layered paintings employing a range of techniques including airbrush, oil paint, and inkjet printing. Often juxtaposing figurative and abstract forms, the artist persistently examines the nature, boundaries, and tensions of the painted surface. In these works a familiar computer software prompt repeatedly obscures the same figure. Williams transformed this convergence of computer screen layers into a starting point for further exploration. From a carefully established procedural framework of drawing, cutting and redrawing monotypes, Williams then distorts, subverts, and obscures the image through painterly experimentation and layering. The digital native source image, traditional printmaking, and improvisational painted gesture collide in ways that are both casual and exacting, humorous and serious, and untethered from any fixed perspective. For Williams, the process of cutting and redrawing is a way to generate abstract images from representational imagery. Willfully obscuring optical boundaries, Williams's paintings make room for the anthropomorphic, amoebic, hallucinogenic, and the commonplace to coalesce into what George Pendle describes as an "intense polychromatic miasma." The viewer is left to sort through the miasma to find the demarcations that the eye craves; to fully perceive the flux of forms, colors, and scraps of language in Williams's painting is to wander through and across hazy layers and find an image both constructed and deconstructing itself. Michael Williams was born in 1978 in Pennsylvania and lives and works in Los Angeles. His work has been the subject of solo exhibitions at venues including Musée des Beaux-Arts de Montreal, Montreal, Canada and Gallery Met, New York, and group exhibitions at notable institutions including: secession, Vienna; Museum of Modern Art, New York; Dallas Museum of Art, Dallas, Texas; Wexner Center for the Arts, Columbus, Ohio; Ballroom Marfa, Marfa, Texas; and the Garage Center for Contemporary Culture, Moscow.

We are pleased to present IF THIS THEN ELSE, an exhibition by Philippe Parreno. This show marks Parreno's first exhibition with Gladstone Gallery. IF THIS THEN ELSE is a two-location exhibition at Gladstone Gallery; two spaces connected throughout the city, a two-headed beast. Installed at one location, a bioreactor houses microorganisms and serves as a living command center for the exhibition at both locations. IF THIS THEN ELSE is a time based-exhibition and a conditional construct. Scripted events are automated by command lines executed within a computer: if a light goes off, then a film is screened and the temperature in the room changes; if the film finishes screening, then the lights are turned on… Activities within the bioreactor control the overall scenario of the exhibition, although the computer writes and repeats the scripts with some variation. Inside the bioreactor, the microorganisms anticipate the rhythms, "predictable" qualities, and dramaturgy of the exhibition environment. In return, the organisms can alter the conditions within the bioreactor and in the exhibition space outside of its habitat, revealing a basic relationship between time and living matter. When the microorganisms inside the bioreactor detect time-related variations, they can mutate or evolve in anticipation of future variations. Alternatively, they can remain passive and follow the transformations by adjusting their inner molecular clocks. The gallery is a domestic setting with shifting climate, light and sound. Filled with helium, new species of fish in My Room Is Another Fish Bowl (2016) hover mid-air in the changing atmosphere on the parlor floor. Happy Ending (2015), transparent blown-glass lamp sculptures, illuminate their own ghostly presence intermittently. The intelligence activity within the bioreactor uptown communicates with the gallery downtown at 21st Street and transforms sequences of projection, sound, air, and light. Parreno's new film, Li-Yan (2016), filmed on location in New York City, premieres in the main gallery along with an immersive sound installation. Upstairs, Mont Analogue (2001), translates the novel of the same name by René Daumal into a series of colorimetric changes. Philippe Parreno lives and works in Paris. H{N)Y P N(Y}OSIS, his first large-scale solo exhibition in the United States, took place last summer at the Park Avenue Armory in New York. Another chapter of this exhibition opened in Milan last October under the name HYPOTHESIS. In October of 2016, Parreno's work will be presented as this year's Hyundai Commission for the Turbine Hall at Tate Modern, London. The bioreactor was conceived and engineered by Jean-Baptiste Boulé (CNRS - French National Museum of Natural History, Sorbonne University) and Nicolas Desprat (Statistical Physics Laboratory, École Normale Supérieure, PSL Research University; Paris Diderot Sorbonne Paris-Cité). Sound design by Nicolas Becker with Cengiz Hartlap.

We are pleased to announce an exhibition of paintings and sculpture by Richard Aldrich. The exhibition features works ranging in scale, material, and technique, from printed dibond, to oil on canvas, to ceramic appliqué. The breadth of work on display encapsulates Aldrich's conceptualism in which migrating forms and systems interact with one another. Existing outside of a linear stylistic progression, Aldrich posits that what is at stake is not style, form or material, but rather how these are utilized and engaged with to express a more global understanding of a complete body–be that an idea, feeling, or concept. Aldrich's paintings are layered with the process of their own creation as well as the inspiration of everyday life and experiences. In Time Stopped, Time Started (2015), splattered wooden slats, previously used as blocks to set paintings upon while working, bear the history of the artist's studio process as excess paint drips have accumulated over the past decade. Enlisted as formal elements, the slats are affixed to the canvas, with slits cut in the linen above them. The weight of the wood allows gravity to stretch and widen the slits over time. Initially the slats, positioned horizontally, measured a process in time; now, in a vertical position, the slats activate a new accumulative durational process. In the artist's work, motifs reoccur and evolve, newly invested with a familiar yet undeniably reflexive, altered narrative; symbolic objects from Aldrich's life are utilized with new interpretation and potential. With The Pinstripes of Tuck Tuck Tuck and The Hurray 7 inches of Tuck Tuck Tuck, printed dibond panels identical to panels previously exhibited in 2013 and 2011 are now affixed with strips of cloth from a worn out shirt and records from Aldrich's other music project, Hurray. Time and memory serves an integral role in the works as the potential of remembering the existence of the previous works, and the question of whether they are the same ones, is part of the understanding of this new presentation. As Aldrich says, "Time can be used as a medium, just like oil paint." Richard Aldrich was born in 1975 in Hampton, Virginia, and lives and works in New York. He has been the subject of solo exhibitions at the San Francisco Museum of Modern Art, San Francisco, and the Contemporary Art Museum, St. Louis. Aldrich has also been included in group exhibitions at notable institutions including: The Museum of Modern Art, New York; Museum Dhondt-Dhaenens, Deurle, Belgium; Institute of Contemporary Art, London; Centro Galego de Arte Contemporánea, Santiago de Compostela, Spain; and the Whitney Museum of American Art, New York. His work is in the collections of the Museum of Modern Art, New York; the Whitney Museum; the San Francisco Museum of Modern Art; and the Smithsonian. In October 2016, Aldrich will be the subject of a solo exhibition at the Museum Dhondt-Dhaenens in Belgium.

We are pleased to present Shelter Island, an exhibition of new photography by Roe Ethridge. The exhibition presents a body of work made during a summer stay at the eastern end of Long Island, New York. Effortlessly employing an array of classic photographic genres–from portraiture to still life to landscape–Ethridge captures his subjects and surrounding environment in vivid, intimate detail. The artist combines the glossy, prefabricated effect of commercial photography with the perspective of fine art photography to create works at once familiar and uncanny, nostalgic and distinctly contemporary. On Shelter Island, Ethridge turned to his family and the American Kit house they rented for the summer. In the home's garage, Ethridge discovered a range of discarded and stored away possessions from the homeowner and their children, who have grown up and moved out. Evocative and intimate, the objects as props bespeak a lifetime of childhood summers spent in a distinctly American tradition–in the images we see stacked Coca-Cola bottles, a boy playing with a baseball bat, a colorful kite. The register of Ethridge's Shelter Island document, however, is less of an idealization of these symbols than a melancholic expression of the end of summer malaise. The sun shines brightly in these images, yet a bouquet of flowers is seen well past its prime, the Coca-Cola bottles appear neglected and gathering dust, and the kite is seen plunged into water and inert, rather than flying buoyantly. In this panoply, an image of Pamela Anderson eating grapes and a grid of iPhone screenshots made by the artist's daughter expand and complicate the Shelter Island narrative. In Ethridge's distinct technique, the passage of time, and of youth, is made both intimate and personal, yet stylized and highly mediated. A color catalogue of Ethridge's work will be published on the occasion of this exhibition. Roe Ethridge was born in 1969 in Miami, Florida, and lives and works in New York. His photographs have appeared in solo exhibitions at the Institute of Contemporary Art, Boston; the Garage Center for Contemporary Culture, Moscow; and Le Consortium, Dijon, France. Ethridge has also been included in group exhibitions at notable institutions including: the Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York; Aspen Art Museum, Aspen, Colorado; the Whitney Museum of American Art; the Barbican Center, London; MoMA PS1, New York; the Museum of Contemporary Art, Chicago; and the Hammer Museum, Los Angeles.

We are pleased to announce NUEVOS CAPRICHOS, an exhibition of new paintings by Los Angeles-based artist Lari Pittman. Known for dense compositions that merge bold graphic design with historical modes of figuration, Pittman intricately crafts paintings shaped by a collision of abstract, geometric, and figurative forms. The artist reimagines and renders cultural mores, imagery from the realms of politics, philosophy, and popular culture, addressing issues of identity and socialization with familiar imagery acting as narrative catalyst. In this exhibition of eight large-scale paintings, Pittman pays homage to Los Caprichos, a suite of etchings by Francisco Goya, first published as an album in 1799. In these etchings Goya illustrates the brutality of human behavior to comment on oppressive social conditions in eighteenth century Spanish culture. Pittman offers vignettes in the form of painting as a vehicle to address a broad range of social political issues, updating and renewing Goya's Caprichos as a contemporary response to increasing levels of violence collectively internalized. In place of Goya's staunchly critical voice, Pittman aligns his subjects with language from Emily Dickinson, employing the poet's voice to express a secular vision of the body, pain, and death. Pittman sees in Dickinson's proto-feminist writing a secular vehicle to ruminate on larger philosophical issues of contemporary trauma, while not essentializing pain for herself or within her body. Pittman's work is calibrated in its balance of effusive, colorful, and buoyant forms with the ominous and uneasy effects of the figure. The artist depicts violence and decay as well as utopian fantasy; rather than serving as extraneous embellishment, decorative elements such as scrolls, arrows, borders and patterning function as formal devices moving the eye like a magnificent mosaic. Pittman's paintings are installed according to a domino motif that relates the canvases through connecting numbers, revealing both a narrative thread and linguistic play on the word domino, deriving from the 17th century word for lord or master. In this layered meaning, Pittman weaves together elements from the past with familiar scenes from our contemporary reality, exploring the way history is constructed and categorized, illustrating how trauma is transmitted and experienced visually, historically, and culturally. Lari Pittman was born in 1952 in Glendale, California, and lives and works in Los Angeles, where he is a professor at University of California, Los Angeles. Pittman has been awarded the J. Paul Getty Trust Fund for the Visual Arts Fellowship Grant in Painting, the National Endowment for the Arts Fellowship Grant in Painting, and the Skowhegan Medal for Painting. He participated in Documenta X (1997) and four Whitney Biennial exhibitions (1985, 1993, 1995, 1997), and has been the subject of solo exhibitions at notable institutions including: the Contemporary Art Museum, St. Louis; Le Consortium, Dijon, France; the Institute of Contemporary Art, London; Centre d'Art Contemporain, Geneva; Los Angeles County Museum of Art, Los Angeles; the Corcoran Museum, Washington, D. C.; Contemporary Arts Museum, Houston; and Villa Arson, Nice, France.

We are pleased to announce an exhibition of new work by Sharon Lockhart. This will be the artist's fifth solo exhibition with the gallery. Lockhart is known for creating photographs and films that mine the formal terrain of her chosen mediums, while forming work that is deeply insightful towards the communities she engages. In an ongoing project, Lockhart focuses on a young woman named Milena, whom the artist met in Poland while producing her 2009 film, Podwórka. Lockhart and the then nine-year-old Milena established a close friendship and collaborative involvement that has continued to grow and evolve. Through her work and relationship with Milena, Lockhart explores both visual and philosophical approaches to childhood, as well as the cultural and sociological operations inherent to photography. Lockhart's 2015 video installation, Antoine/Milena, pays homage to François Truffaut's The 400 Blows (1959). Truffaut's iconic closing sequence depicts the misunderstood hero, Antoine Doinel, running to the beach, seeing the ocean for the first time, and turning to confront the camera before him. Referencing this sequence, while altering it significantly, Lockhart captures Milena running through the Polish countryside to arrive at the sea. In contrast to Truffaut's stilling of Antoine, in which he zooms in on Antoine's frozen face, Milena approaches the camera in Lockhart's film, locking eyes with the viewer in a gaze that is at once defiant and fragile. Drawing parallels between Truffaut's protagonist and Milena, Lockhart poetically expresses the urgency of self-realization and speculation. A large-format photographic triptych, Milena, Jarosław, 2013 (2014), similarly explores the indefinable nature of both subject and medium. The photographs, which are installed on three architectural volumes, cannot be viewed in full from a single vantage point, requiring visitors to navigate the space to see the triptych in its entirety. These images depict Milena seated indoors, concealing and revealing her face to varying degrees. Her emotions and expressions shift from image to image, and the elusive quality of this installation points to the multifaceted nature of development, self-expression and articulation. The choreographed movements of visitors and gradual revealing of Milena's face functions as a metaphor for the photographic process of exposure and disclosure. Linking histories and images, the themes explored in Lockhart's collaborations with Milena resonate with another ongoing body of work on display, Untitled Study (Rephotographed Snapshot), which the artist began in 1994. The series consists of rephotographed pictures from her personal history, the majority of which were originally taken during Lockhart's childhood by her mother and feature family members. The artist's highly intimate appropriation offers a meditation on her own relationship to childhood and development, as well as portraiture and the aesthetic operations of media. The themes explored in this exhibition inform Lockhart's larger project in Poland, which includes Milena and her companions from the Sociotherapy Center in Rudzienko. From workshops held in the summers of 2014 and 2015, Lockhart created Rudzienko. Co-produced by the Liverpool Biennial and Kadist Art Foundation, the work will premiere in a solo exhibition in 2016 at the Arts Club of Chicago. In this forthcoming filmic installation, Lockhart focuses on Milena and her peers, inspired by the writing of Janusz Korczak, creating space for the child's voice and articulations of their often-overlooked perspectives. Sharon Lockhart was born in 1964 and lives and works in Los Angeles. Lockhart's work has been the subject of numerous solo exhibitions at international institutions including Wiener Secession, Austria; Walker Art Center, Minneapolis; Fogg Art Museum at Harvard University, Cambridge; Museum Boijmans Van Beuningen, Rotterdam; Kunsthalle Zürich; Museum of Contemporary Art, Chicago; Wolfsburg Museum, Germany; San Francisco Museum of Modern Art; and Los Angeles County Museum of Art. Her films have been included in the New York Film Festival, Vienna International Film Festival, Berlin Film Festival, and the Sundance Film Festival. In 2013 the exhibition Milena, Milena debuted at the Centre for Contemporary Art, Ujazdowski Castle, Warsaw and traveled to Bonniers Konsthall in Stockholm and Kunstmuseum Luzern. In 2016, Lockhart will be the subject of solo exhibitions at the Arts Club of Chicago and the Rose Art Museum at Brandeis University.

We are pleased to announce an exhibition of works by Pierre Klossowski. Immersed in literature and art within his family of artists since childhood, Klossowski was mentored by Rainer Maria Rilke and André Gide. Fluent in French, German, and Latin, the artist translated works by Benjamin, Kafka, Virgil, Nietzsche, Hölderlin, and Saint Augustine, among others. The arrival of World War II prompted Klossowski's theological studies, which concluded only a few years later when he renounced Catholicism and Lutheranism. Klossowski published several novels and essays before his career in art, and was commended by Gilles Deleuze, Michel Foucault, and other postmodern figures. Klossowski's artistic career began at age 49 when he included six drawings to accompany his novel Roberte ce soir. This exhibition will include Klossowski's early graphite drawings from 1957 as well as several polychromatic works made after 1972, when he began using colored-pencils in his work. The graphite drawing of a figure resembling his wife, titled Etude de nu, Denise (1957), is the smallest and earliest work on view in the exhibition. Also bearing resemblance to Denise, the character Roberte reoccurs as the protagonist in Klossowski's erotic compositions, and is seen in La Déclaration Intempestive ou Roberte à l'Hotel de Longchamps (1979), La generosite de Roberte (1983), and Roberte aux barres parallèles (1984). His artworks evoke characters and scenes from his novels, but they are not merely illustrations of his writing. Instead, Klossowski's drawings and writings alternate as vehicles of ritualistic and repeated returns to allegories, myths, and literature. Described by Klossowski as grandes machines, his large drawings are rich with Sadean decadence and Surrealist sensibilities; the Mannerist-like figures are rendered in labor-intensive feathery pencil strokes. Repetition is central to Klossowski's works, whether it is via notions of "simulacrum" or mise en abyme. La migraine de Charmide (1984) and Charmide se soumettant à l'incantation de Socrate (1985) belong to the Charmide and Socrates series, referencing Plato's dialogue and mirroring the Socratic relationship between Klossowski and André Gide. As one rendition of the archetypal myth Klossowski has depicted since the 1950's, Lucréce et Tarquin (1990) is also a work by the fictional artist Tonnere within Klossowski's novel La Révocation de l'édit de Nantes. Very different from Titian or Tintoretto's Lucretia and Tarquin, Klossowski's version conveys a peculiarity through the matron's hand gestures and facial expressions; the latter modeled after the artist's wife, Denise. Pierre Klossowski (1905-2001) was born in Paris and lived between France, Germany, and Switzerland. His work has been the subject of major survey exhibitions at Circulo de Bellas Artes de Madrid, Madrid (2007); Centre Pompidou – Musée National d'Art Moderne, Paris (2007); Museum Ludwig, Köln (2006); Whitechapel Art Gallery, London (2006); Sala Parpallo, Valencia (1991); Museo Nacional Centro de Arte Reina Sofia, Madrid (1991); and Kunsthalle, Bern (1981). Klossowski's works were included in documenta 7, Kassel, in 1982. The Artist authored several publications, including Le Bain de Diane (1980); Le Baphomet (1965); Nietzsche et le cercle vicieux (1969); La Monnaie vivant (1970); and the trilogy Les Lois de l'hospitalité, consisted of Roberte ce soir (1954), La Révocation de l'édit de Nantes (1959), and Le Souffleur (1960).

We are pleased to announce an exhibition of works by Jean Tinguely. This exhibition will include works by the artist from 1954 through 1991. Salvaged pieces of iron and wheels collected from junkyards provided abstract shapes for the artist. Using these "forms" and incorporating other found objects, Tinguely welded and assembled sculptures, creating a new function with the byproducts of consumption. He installed old motors, often decommissioned from 78rpm phonographs, onto his sculptures to produce unpredictable and non-repeating motion. Within these dynamic sculptures of chance, accident, and inconsistency, Tinguely's sculptures often entertain or agitate the audience with their humor and irony. Tinguely is perhaps best known in New York for his monumental self-destroying sculpture Homage to New York, presented for only one evening in March of 1960 in the sculpture garden at MoMA. The earliest work on view in the show will be Tinguely's Meta-Malevich relief from 1954, whose title references constructivist compositions. A hidden pulley and rubber band system behind the pictorial plane moves white geometric shapes in front of the black background in non-repeating arrangements. Also on view will be a large group of his motorized sculptures, including Scooter (1960), a scooter with only one wheel rotated by a motor concealed within its helmet; Raichle Nr.1 (1974), a pair of the Swiss-branded ski boots topped with shears snipping at the air; and Trüffelsau (1984), the skull of a boar brought to life with its jaw chomping while its driftwood tail rotates slowly. Several of Tinguely's lamps will also be installed, including L'Odalisque (1989), a 6-part sculpture with light fixtures and moving components. Jean Tinguely (1925-1991) was born in Fribourg, Switzerland. While Tinguely worked primarily in France and Switzerland, he produced several works and completed commissions throughout Europe, United States, and Japan. His work has been presented at numerous international institutions including the Museum of Modern Art, New York; Centre Georges Pompidou, Paris; Stedelijk Museum, Amsterdam; Moderna Museet, Stockholm; Louisiana Museum, Humlebaek; Institute of Contemporary Art, London; and Museum Haus Lange, Krefeld. Retrospectives have been presented by Centre National d'Art Contemporain, Paris (1971); Wilhelm Lehmbruck-Museum, Duisburg (1978); Zurich Kunsthaus (1982); and Palazzo Grassi, Venice (1987). His work has also been included in major historical exhibitions including "Bewogen Beweging" ("Art in Motion") at Stedelijk Museum, Amsterdam (1961); São Paulo Biennale (1965); "The Machine" at MoMA (1968); and "Paris-Paris" at Centre Georges Pompidou, Paris (1980). In October of 2016, an exhibition of sculptures including Tinguely's "meta-matic" drawing machines will be on view along with his graphic works and artist's books at the Stedelijk Museum in Amsterdam.

We are pleased to announce an exhibition of new paintings and drawings by Carroll Dunham. The exhibition features nine large-scale paintings drawing on the nude bathers and pastoral landscapes familiar from Dunham's works since the late 2000s. The new paintings show the evolution of the artist's bathers, while making room for new subjects to enter the frame and complicate the visual terrain, including animals and a nude male figure introduced here in paintings for the first time. Dunham's females are boldly animated figures, swinging from a tree or riding with extended arms atop a horse. The artist's figures are both in and of their surroundings, composed of recurring motifs that are at once subject matter and formal devices. In Horse and Rider (My X) (2013-2015), the artist makes faintly visible the compositional elements of the painting: the structural device of an X, generated by two corner-to-corner lines, aligns the figure with both the landscape and the surface structure, as the nude rider's arms extend out and upwards, legs resting over her horse's rear towards the painting's lower corners. The eye quickly finds the focal point of the X: Dunham directs our gaze purposefully and unabashedly towards the horse and female's naked buttocks. Viewers are invited to enter the painting at this point, with an erotic and comedic twist to the pastoral image before them. Throughout his career, Dunham has developed images that would become paintings through drawing. For the first time, this exhibition will show a suite of such studies, for Horse and Rider (My X), alongside the painting. Arranged chronologically, the graphite drawings reveal the evolution of Dunham's motifs and compositions over a period of two years. In addition to elucidating the development of the painting, the works demonstrate the strength and range of Dunham's drawing practice. Pushing color, form, and line to create collision-like interactions of exuberant geometries, Dunham constructs a compact tension between the interlocking forms that relate to both subject and landscape, foreground and background. Vivid frictions are particularly felt in three yellow and black paintings titled Big Bang, in which the artist depicts the infinite vastness of the Big Bang. In an attempt to render the impossible, the paintings become part cosmological fantasy, while still rooted in the conventions and scale of a natural landscape. The exhibition will be accompanied by a forthcoming catalogue, featuring an essay by Lynne Tillman. Carroll Dunham was born in 1949 and lives and works in New York and Connecticut. Dunham's work has been the subject of numerous solo exhibitions at international institutions including Museum Ludwig, Cologne; Millesgården, Stockholm; Drammens Museum, Drammen, Norway; a mid-career retrospective was held at the New Museum of Contemporary Art, New York. Dunham has also been included in notable group exhibitions including multiple Whitney Biennials and SITE Santa Fe; and at institutions including Musée d'art moderne et contemporain, Geneva; the Museum of Modern Art, New York; Museu Picasso, Barcelona; The Institute of Contemporary Art, Boston.

We are pleased to announce an exhibition of new works by Jim Hodges. The Brussels gallery space will be filled with mirrored glass diptychs in a spectrum of colors, each paired with their mirrored black companion. The panels hang in correspondence to one another, appearing in various positions: occupying corners, hanging adjacent to or across the room, in an open-ended context to each other. Hodges attributes the material attraction of mirrors to their property of "offering more questions than answers." He has described "the transcendent potential of mirrors to both reflect and distort reality as well as suggest altered states, while serving as both concrete substance and vaporous metaphor." Jim Hodges was born in 1957 in Spokane, Washington, and lives and works in New York. His work has been the subject of numerous solo exhibitions at institutions including: the Centre Georges Pompidou, Paris; Camden Art Centre, London; the Aspen Art Museum; CGAC, Santiago de Compostela, Spain; Tang Teaching Museum and Art Gallery at Skidmore College, Saratoga Springs, New York; and the Museum of Contemporary Art, Chicago. Most recently a major traveling retrospective of Hodges's work was exhibited at the Institute of Contemporary Art, Boston; Walker Art Center, Minneapolis; the Dallas Museum of Art; and the Hammer Museum, Los Angeles. Hodges has received multiple awards and grants including the Association International des Critiques d'art, the Albert Ucross Prize, Washington State Arts Commission, and the Penny McCall Foundation Grant; Hodges was also appointed to serve as the Acting Director of the Graduate Sculpture Department at the Yale School of Art for the 2011/2012 academic year.



We are pleased to announce At My Own Risk. Couldn't Be Better., an exhibition of new work by Belgian artist Walter Swennen. This will be Swennen's first American exhibition in over twenty years. The exhibition will feature Swennen's humorous and incisive brightly hued paintings that move between representation and abstraction. Language, legibility, subjectivity and symbolic meaning are explored and challenged in Swennen's uncompromising works, which are at once lighthearted and deeply resonant. Before focusing on painting in the 1980s, Swennen first pursued poetry and philosophy. An abiding interest in the associative qualities of language is evident in his painting as inscriptions and suggestive linguistic experimentation populates his canvases and informs his titles. Swennen employs multiple languages simultaneously, offering a collage of repurposed and layered meanings. In several paintings the artist asserts a nuanced but decidedly individualistic message: a piece titled Max Says (2015) reads My Disinclination Remains Free in scratchy uneven red letters, inviting curiosity and interest in Swennen's relationship to German philosopher Max Stirner, whose anti-authoritarian critique of nineteenth century Prussian society is cited here. In Ghost Dance (2015) we see muted pink and blue translucent washes of paint with a bold red element from American currency painted over the image of a ghost. Is Swennen leading us to consider the Ghost Dance of Native American religions and the American capitalist legacy? The artist's paintings resist conclusive reading, enticing the viewer with familiarity but allowing much to remain unknown. In combination with the uses of language, Swennen's visual vocabulary is populated with everyday imagery of wine bottles, common fish, pigs, and other characters drawn from pop culture sources and made anonymous. What is important to the artist and endures over his thirty-year career is the question of randomness – Swennen makes clear that nothing is premeditated. The artist discovers images from the world, from visual culture, and recontextualizes symbols, words, and all the associative qualities they carry. Walter Swennen was born in 1946 in Brussels, where he presently lives and works. His work has been the subject of numerous solo exhibitions at international institutions including Culturgest Lisbon; Kunstverein Freiburg; MUKHA Antwerp; Kunsthal Rotterdam; WIELS Contemporary Art Center. Swennen has also been included in notable group exhibitions including: Atopolis, Manège de Sury, Mons (2015); The Importance of Being..., Museo Nacional de Bellas Artes, Havana (2015); Idiolect, Arentshuis, Brussels (2009); La Belgique Visionnaire/Visionair België, curated by Harald Szeemann, Palais des Beaux-Arts/Paleis voor Schone Kunsten, Brussels (2005); Voir en Peinture, FRAC Ile de France/Le Plateau, Paris (2003); La Consolation, Centre d'Art National Contemporain, Le Magasin, Grenoble (1999); and Trouble Spot. Painting, Antwerp (1999). In November, Kunstverein für die Rheinlande und Westfalen, Düsseldorf, will hold a solo exhibition of Swennen's work.

We are pleased to announce Trinity and Powers: In Search of Breadfruit, an exhibition of new wall works and sculptures by Kathryn Andrews. In this exhibition, symbols of Hollywood, leisure, and consumer culture collide with political sloganeering and campaign conceits, arriving at a complex and often humorous narrative of celebrity, politics, imperialism, and individual agency. Andrews juxtaposes contemporary celebrity culture with iconography of heroism and political campaigning in her sculptural paintings series, The Presidents. In these works the artist establishes a dialectical relationship between nineteenth century Currier and Ives election posters and Hollywood relics, embedding the byproducts of celebrity culture within the structure of her paintings. Andrews does so with a sly understanding of the market her work is commoditized within, asking viewers to consider the ways in which artworks, presidential candidates, and Hollywood icons are similarly embraced and consumed. A sculpture comprising lounge chairs and highly sharpened beach umbrella poles will fill one area of the urban gallery space in Brussels. Through discordant formal and symbolic resonances, these familiar symbols of leisure take on a threatening proposition in the unfamiliar context. Elsewhere, in a playful take on minimalist serial forms and early modernist fetishizations of the exotic, Andrews creates gumball machines, printing nude Tahitian women on oversized monochrome gumballs, colliding histories of consumption and perception. The seductive high gloss materiality of Andrews's sculptures trade in cues of pleasure and desire; the artist points at our ability to recognize symbols as structures of authority, of perception, and of pleasure, creating a powerful visual experience in which symbolic meaning coexists with engrossing phenomenological effect. Kathryn Andrews was born in 1973 in Mobile, Alabama, and lives and works in Los Angeles. Her work has been the subject of numerous solo exhibitions and group institutions including The Bass Museum of Art, Miami; Museum Ludwig, Cologne; Ullens Center for Contemporary Art, Beijing; and the Institute of Contemporary Art, Philadelphia. Kathryn Andrews: Run for President will open in November at the Museum of Contemporary Art Chicago.

Hello walls, (Hello, hello.) How'd things go for you today? Don't you miss her, Since she up and walked away? And I'll bet you dread to spend another lonely night with me, But lonely walls, I'll keep you company. –Hello Walls, Willie Nelson, 1962 We are pleased to announce Hello Walls, a group exhibition of artworks executed directly on the walls of both New York gallery locations. Works made in situ are part of a tradition rich in associations, and Hello Walls traces how that tradition has developed since the conceptual improvisations of the 1960s. The exhibition features works by Ricci Albenda, Mel Bochner, Angela Bulloch, Daniel Buren, Neil Campbell, Michael Craig-Martin, Jeff Elrod, Douglas Gordon, Arturo Herrera, Karl Holmqvist, Sol LeWitt, Wangechi Mutu, Raymond Pettibon, Ugo Rondinone, Kara Walker, and Lawrence Weiner. Hello Walls invites participating artists to engage a single two-dimensional wall plane, and the range of works on display evidences the breadth across the tradition of creating art directly on the wall. From text-based works by artists such as Lawrence Weiner and Mel Bochner, to image-based pieces by Michael Craig-Martin, Raymond Pettibon and Kara Walker, to the geometric abstractions of artists such as Neil Campbell, Angela Bulloch and Arturo Herrera, a wall's surface proves fertile ground for a range of responses. For some in this exhibition, wall works constitute the central focus of their practice, while for others it is one facet. In the delineated schema of an artist like Sol LeWitt, wall drawings follow a carefully circumscribed lexicon, whereas approaches by Jeff Elrod and Wangechi Mutu allow for spontaneity and unplanned gestures in their process. Addressing the wall as a physical and metaphysical site rather than simply a surface for display, the artworks in this exhibition activate space as a material, speaking to the legacy of minimalism and conceptualism, while continuing the tradition of experimental propositions within the parameters of exhibition space. Hello Walls takes on a historic and often marginalized approach to art-making, while the multigenerational span of participating artists demonstrates an active and transforming tradition.

We are pleased to announce an exhibition of new work by Cameron Jamie. Jamie is known for working in a wide range of media, creating films, sculptures, works on paper, and artist books that are united by an experimental approach to traditional materials and methods. This exhibition will present Jamie's recent explorations in printmaking, as well as new ceramic masks and sculptures. Jamie's monotypes are the result of extensive experimentation with printmaking processes. The prints are richly layered with colorful ink washes, staccato pen lines, and the veiled form of a masked bird-like figure, renewing a familiar motif found throughout the artist's paintings and books. Layering, erasure, working, and reworking is a generative process for Jamie, as artifacts of partially erased gestures activate the final image with records of the artist's process. This exhibition will also feature ceramic masks and abstract sculptures. Jamie's ceramic sculptures are formed from organic, hand-molded shapes and pieces; through repeated firing and glazing, the structures are glossed in an animated surface pattern of swirling lava varnishes with spectacular richness. For the first time, Jamie will present his masks in a manner that allows one to view the interior of the ceramic piece, foregrounding and aligning the position of the viewer as that of the mask wearer. Jamie's films and sculptures are often described as a form of anthropological investigation; with this new mode of presentation we are invited in not only as voyeurs of the artwork's often hidden interior space, but also to empathize with the masked. The material exploration on display demonstrates the artist's ability to traverse the conventional and experimental at once, re-imagining recognizable forms and expanding the discourse of ceramic and monotype. Jamie's new book, Front Lawn Funerals and Cemeteries, will be released at Printed Matter, Inc. (New York) on April 29, and a limited edition artist book titled KOPBF Book XIII will be available through Walther König in April. Cameron Jamie was born in Los Angeles in 1969 and lives in Paris. His work has been presented in solo museum exhibitions at the Kunsthalle Zurich (2013) and the Walker Art Center, Minneapolis (2006), traveling to the MIT List Visual Arts Center. Jamie has been featured in film festivals and major group exhibitions including the Berlin Biennial (2010), the Whitney Biennial (2006), the Venice Biennale (2005), and Let's Entertain/Au-dela du spectacle at the Centre Georges Pompidou, Paris (2000-2001); in September Jamie will participate in the 2015 Lyon Biennale. In 2008 Jamie was the first recipient of the Yanghyun Prize.

We are pleased to announce at sunset, with snow falling, by starlight, an exhibition of sculptures by British artist Andrew Lord. The exhibition will feature three large-scale assemblages composed of cups, bowls, pots, and urns after Gauguin's ceramics and drawings. At sunset is the last piece the artist built in his New York studio where he worked for 23 years. Lord transported the unfinished work to New Mexico and painted the surface at sunset, arriving at a luminous glaze evocative of the dramatic light of Carson mesa. The artist approached this process intent to consider how the ideas he formed in the early 1970s have transformed over time–ideas about Impressionism, Cubism, gesture, the body, light, shade, and memory. Lord reinterprets Gauguin's forms as vessels for exploring the light on the Carson mesa plain in New Mexico; the titling of Lord's three pieces invokes both Gauguin and the site of production, bringing forth sources of both material and poetic inspiration. The artist's recasting of Gauguin's forms magnifies the scale of the original figures and provides fertile ground for interpreting the natural landscape. In an artist statement Lord describes the trajectory of his art making and relationship to Gauguin's forms as follows: In the ceramics I made from the 1970s onwards, painting objects at different times of the day, observing them in different types of light or no light at all, I was trying to grasp a narrative I'd seen in Gauguin's ceramics. By placing objects together, assembling single works into groups of thirty or more, I wanted to present an idea as big as a painting, a view of the world as big as Monet's Soleil couchant. Andrew Lord was born in 1950 in Rochdale, England and lives and works in Paris and New York. His work has been the subject of numerous solo exhibitions at international institutions including The Carnegie Museum of Art, Pittsburgh; Camden Arts Center, London; Rijksmuseum Twenthe, Enschede; Milton Keynes Gallery, England; and Santa Monica Museum of Art, Santa Monica. He has also been included in group exhibitions including: "Atelier 15," Stedelijk Museum, Amsterdam; "Westkunst. Heute," Museen der Stadt, Köln; "Anderer Leute Kunst," Museum Haus Lange, Krefeld; the 1995 Whitney Biennial; "Site and Insight," MoMA PS1, New York; "The Third Mind," Palais de Tokyo; and "Artists and Poets," Secession, Vienna. In 2014 Andrew Lord was resident of the Cité International des Arts Paris; this summer he will participate in the Royal Academy of Arts Summer Exhibition.

first time my father overheard me listening to this bit of music he asked me, what is it? it's called Love For Three Oranges, I informed him. boy, he said, that's getting it cheap. he meant sex. listening to it I always imagined three oranges sitting there, you know how orange they can get, so mightily orange. –from Charles Bukowski, Three Oranges We are pleased to announce Love for Three Oranges, a group exhibition organized by Karma, New York. The exhibition will feature new works by Nathaniel Axel, Darren Bader, Will Boone, Joe Bradley, Matt Connors, Roe Ethridge, Paul Lee, Nate Lowman, Sarah Lucas, Elizabeth Peyton, Torey Thornton, and Michael Williams. The exhibition borrows its title from a line in Bukowski's 1992 poem, Three Oranges. The multilayered exchange of textual and pictorial reference at play transforms a simple homonym into a proposition that color not only serves mimetic representation, but is also weighted with associative qualities, innuendo, cliché, and metaphor. The works in this exhibition demonstrate across a broad range of media the interdependence of color and meaning, and the many manifestations of this exchange.

We are pleased to present an exhibition of recent work by Anish Kapoor. The exhibition includes a large-scale sculpture, Double Vertigo (2012), presented in the ground floor of a townhome at 6 Rue du Grand Cerf, adjacent to the gallery. Double Vertigo is comprised of two curved, reflective stainless steel planes that alter spatial perception and create the illusion of standing in an infinite expanse. This effect engenders a sense of awe and emptiness that Homi Bhabha has described in Kapoor's work as "the contrary, yet correlated forces of withdrawal and disclosure." The exhibition also features work in a wide range of mediums, offering a unique opportunity to see the myriad materials and methods that Kapoor has explored throughout his career, at scales both intimate and monumental. In several works, the artist uses materials such as silicone, resin, wax, and earth to create organic, gritty forms. While the surface of these sculptures contrasts with the polish of the mirrored works, they function similarly as explorations of depth that imply cavernous interiority and indeterminate sense of dimension. The exhibition also includes a series of gouache drawings, an integral aspect of Kapoor's practice. As in many of the artist's sculptures, the drawings are heavily layered with material. To perceive the richness of pigment on the paper, one's eye must move in and out of the material depth, feeling the push and pull of hues bleeding into one another and of indefinable shapes coming to form as both contingent matter and restless proposition. Anish Kapoor was born in 1954 in Bombay, India, and has lived and worked in London since 1973. Major solo exhibitions of his work have been presented at the Museum of Contemporary Art, Sydney; Le Grand Palais, Paris; National Gallery of Modern Art, New Delhi; Museo Guggenheim Bilbao, Bilbao; the Tate Modern, London; Fondazione Prada, Milan; Kunsthaus Bregenz, Bregenz; Museo Archeologico Nazionale, Naples; Haus der Kunst, Munich; and the Institute of Contemporary Art, Boston. Kapoor received the Premio Duemila for his British Pavilion at the Venice Biennale in 1990 and the Turner Prize in 1991. In June 2015 the Château de Versailles will present a solo exhibition of his work.

Everything is a cryptogram if we desire it to be, and so often we do. We look at the world, of which art is a subset, and recode it as a maze, dream a Minotaur at its heart; and when we get there, it's over. This is how the viewer learns to view, now, the legacy of decades of conceptual art—a spectatorship style that is not, precisely, seeing. So it's day, or night, or both, and amid a suite of painted figures in submarine light, a repeated, changeable gesture argues for its own nameless significance, while elsewhere portraits cluster obliquely around a handheld Babylonian idol. Forget hallucinating themes to be disinterred, a conversation with art history. Things can also be hard to see because they're uncommon, now, like the active valuing and preserving of certain painterly traditions, techniques (tones, grounding, paint application, the use of lead white), a respect for unbounded emotional reverie. The head, a binary thing, says we are this or that, male or female, real or unreal. It denies that a painting, like a poem, might be a thing in itself, not a substitute for something else. Once activated, another and perhaps more acute complex of receptors—heart, instinct, bodily intelligence—refutes all that in turn, and the maze only expands. Make a leap from a centuries-old statue to Georges Bataille's Acéphale, to that word's Greek roots—akephalos, meaning headless—and to the figure of the chandler, beheading the candle in order to light it. The head is clipped; what's below bursts into flame. –Martin Herbert We are pleased to present an exhibition of paintings by Victor Man. The exhibition will include several works from Man's series, "The Chandler," presented for the first time in the United States. Paintings in this series portray a seated, decapitated figure holding its head in its lap. The series' title refers to the medieval term for candle-maker, one who cuts off the top of a candle in order to light it. As in much of Man's work, "The Chandler" series alludes to historic motifs, in particular the Greek acéphale. In the other works in the exhibition, multiple references co-exist, from Italian Pre-Renaissance painting to forms of primitivism. The references within these paintings bear a constant sense of repression of reality, which proliferated in Europe during the early avant-garde period at the beginning of the twentieth century. Within the stylistic codes of Man's works, one discovers a figurative idiom aspiring to a transhistorical station of painting that is beyond contemporaneity. A catalogue with a narrative by Torsten Slama will be published in conjunction with the exhibition. Victor Man was born in 1974 and lives in Rome and Cluj, Romania.

It's a hot summer day in the southern part of Italy. Clouds blow by; the thermostat glows red at its tip. The horizon shakes unevenly, like a bleak, overexposed line. It hurts to focus your eyes on it. In the dryness and the sweltering heat you recognize the objects around you only by their outlines, which repeat themselves beyond your view. NO MELON NO LEMON is the supreme palindrome. It is dry wood in the shape of olive trees, dark burnt earth around them. No citrus fruits, no water vessel in sight—just the echo of the shapes. NO MELON NO LEMON is the repeating sound in your head as you read the same meaning backwards and forwards. We are pleased to present Claudia Comte's first U.S. solo exhibition. The Swiss artist will create a site-specific environment comprising paintings and chainsaw-cut sculptures. Each work functions as part of a modular system of intricately connected elements. Arranged in a rhythmic, mathematical manner, they become an immersive space where forms repeat in delirious, self-referencing patterns. Comte's wood sculptures have subtly recognizable forms, simultaneously reminiscent of classical sculptures and cartoon figures. Through their soft curves they take on anthropomorphic qualities that suggest they are actually characters—rebellious protagonists in the middle of a large, organized choir; troublemakers dancing out of line while the music pumps out a rhythmic beat. Comte's sculptures sit on plinths that appear to have folded out from the walls. Their heights and depths are exaggerated almost to comedic effect: some extend nearly to the ceiling; others are low to the ground and cut through large expanses of the space. The lines that the plinths create are mirrored by additional lines carved into them and by vertical stripes which are painted on the walls and on circular canvases. These painted stripes toy with each other: sometimes matching each other's rhythms, other times bisecting each other at ninety degrees, creating syncopation, and their own sequential system. Repetitions with subtle variations are a leitmotif in Comte's work, which she uses to activate historical references and modern art codes. The title of the exhibition is a direct response to repetitive gesture. Like the exhibition itself, NO MELON NO LEMON can be read backwards and forwards, so that neither the beginning nor the end nor the entry point is apparent. Each element is interconnected and dependent on each other, and each feels as if it could be repeated endlessly. The repetition and intersection of the lines become a pattern—the pattern becomes a grid and the grid becomes a matrix. It is within this matrix that all of the three-dimensional forms are built: organic, abstract sculptures standing in direct confrontation with their linear surroundings. Ultimately, there is harmony: between the wooden panels (left in a raw state, roughly cut and burnt dark), the wall painting (rigid and perfectly executed, bright and glowing), and the sculptures (impure in form and yet meticulously polished). It's hot and captivating; it's a volcano waiting to erupt. It's 100 degrees and the ice cream has melted. Comte was born in Grancy, Switzerland, and now lives and works in Berlin. She has been the subject of solo exhibitions at Haus Konstruktiv, Zurich, Switzerland; Centre Culturel Suisse, Paris; and the Swiss Institute of Rome, Rome. She has also been included in group exhibitions at Kunsthaus Glarus, Glarus, Switzerland; Aargauer Kunsthaus, Aarau, Switzerland; Elevation 1049, Gstaad, Switzerland; and at SALTS, Basel, Switzerland.

I am a beautiful monster who shares his secrets with the wind. What I love most in others is myself. –Francis Picabia, "Baccarat," 1940 We are pleased to present Beautiful Monsters, a group exhibition curated by Douglas Fogle. The exhibition explores the enduring artistic impulse to render the human figure as a way of holding up a mirror to the self. The works in Beautiful Monsters illustrate a variety of artists' approaches to this impulse over the last century. From intricate renderings to simple gestures, they utilize a range of techniques in an effort to represent both the human form and the self. Shifting from playful to melancholic, poetic to humorous, the exhibition presents a complex version of the self that is a "beautiful monster." Frequently blurring the boundaries between figuration and abstraction, a number of the works on view demonstrate the challenge of representing the human form and the elusive self. From a layered oil portrait in which a figure seems hidden within an abstracted background, to a simple pencil drawing of a neoclassical male nude holding his own decapitated head, Francis Picabia's varied representations of the human form show a deep interest in the complex psychology that lies beneath the surface. With similarly complex psychological undertones, Andro Wekua's collages and paintings position the human figure in a variety of self-referential, dreamlike landscapes. Other works in the exhibition capture human forms that are simultaneously emerging from and trapped within the mediums through which they are represented. Michael Dean's concrete, geometric sculptures are made to scale with the artist's body and are no larger than he himself can carry. They function, ultimately, as surrogates for his own figure. Marisa Merz's evocative clay heads attempt to muscle their unique visions of the human form into our own physical space, and David Hammons's nearly translucent body prints seem to float on paper, ready at any moment to jump off of it or recede back into it. Other featured artists include Hans Bellmer, Jack Goldstein, João Maria Gusmão and Pedro Paiva, Jean-Luc Moulène, and Jack Smith. Together they show the "beautiful monster" that is inherent in the human form.

We are pleased to present an exhibition of new work by Paloma Varga Weisz. The exhibition includes a series of wood sculptures, held on floating shelves and in cabinets. Pragmatically designed and made of unadorned, untreated wood, these displays are seamlessly integrated into the historically domestic space of the gallery, which was originally designed as a family townhome. The objects they hold appear to be components of a memory or personal story, strung together in order to construct a narrative. In a single sculpture placed outside of these displays, a young child figure lies under a glass coffee table and looks up to a tea service arranged on it. The child is partly realistic, partly out of focus, as if it is the lingering presence of something that happened here in the past. Like a strong memory, it is temporally disconnected from the space in the present but continues to have a physical impact on it. Gaston Bachelard wrote in The Poetics of Space, "In the wardrobe there exists a centre of order that protects the entire house against unwanted disorder." Similarly, Varga Weisz's shelves, cabinets, and sculptures seem to reveal a personal system of classification developed to keep memories in order. The effect of seeing a physical manifestation of this inherently psychological system is uncanny, as it simultaneously relies on and lies outside of time and space. Despite the emphasis on systematizing, cabinet doors are left ajar and other, similar gestures suggest openness or incompleteness. They allude to the paradox of giving order to temporal experiences: though such ordering is essential, memories are inevitably altered by the progression of time, making a closed, complete system impossible. Varga Weisz lives and works in Düsseldorf, Germany. Her work has been presented in major solo exhibitions at the Kabinett für aktuelle Kunst, Bremerhaven, Germany; the Douglas Hyde Gallery, Dublin; the Museum Morsbroich, Leverkusen, Germany (with Rosemarie Trockel); and Chapter Arts Centre, Wales. She has been included in group exhibitions at the Museum of Modern Art, New York; the Hayward Gallery, London; the Kunsthalle Krems, Austria; Kunstsammlung Nordrhein-Westfalen, Düsseldorf; the Venice Biennale; and the Berlin Biennale. She trained at Staatliche Kunstakademie, Düsseldorf.

"Rocked by the wind and the waves; night falls; the waves slap the bow of our dinghy, and it pitches; the moon rises. In the position in which I am sitting, it was shining on my right leg and the portion of my white sock that was between my trouser and my shoe." Gustave Flaubert, Flaubert in Egypt We are pleased to present an exhibition of new paintings and works on paper by Elizabeth Peyton. Subjects of her previous works have included Napoleon, Kurt Cobain, Queen Elizabeth II, Georgia O'Keeffe, Balzac, Richard Wagner, Elias Bender Rønnenfelt, Paris, Klara Lidén, Isa Genzken, Sid Vicious, Jonas Kaufmann in Massenet's opera, Werther, David Bowie, Tony Just, Jonathan Horowitz, Keith Richards, Tim Riggins from Friday Night Lights, and Barack and Michelle Obama, amongst many others. Since 2007 Peyton has incorporated the still life into her range of subjects with works such as Pati (2007), Balzac + Roses (2008),Flaubert + Madame Bovary (Elephants) (2008), Camille Claudel and Flowers (Still Life) (2009), Actaeon, Justin Bieber and Grey Roses (2010), Flowers, Lichtenstein, Parsifal (2011), and Berlin, Hyacinth and Black Teapot(2014). Elizabeth Peyton was born in Connecticut in 1965 and currently lives and works in New York. In 1993, she had her first solo show in New York in room 828 in the Hotel Chelsea and has since been the subject of exhibitions at leading institutions throughout the United States and Europe. Her mid-career survey, "Live Forever," was presented at the New Museum in New York in 2008 and traveled to the Walker Arts Center in Minneapolis, The Whitechapel Art Gallery in London, and the Bonnefantenmuseum in Maastricht. She has also been included in numerous group exhibitions including "Campo" at the 1995 Venice Biennale, "Greater New York" at PS1 in 2000, "Cher Pientre, Lieber Maler, Dear Painter" at the Centre Pompidou in 2002, the 2004 Whitney Biennial, "The Painting of Modern Life" at the Hayward Gallery in London in 2007, "Van Gogh Live!" at the Fondation Vincent Van Gogh in 2013, "NYC 1993: Experimental Jet Set, Trash and No Star" at the New Museum in 2013, and "Paint New York: Paintings from the American East Coast" at the Kunstforeningen GL Strand (2014). Her work is included in leading public collections, including the Guggenheim Museum, New York; Museum of Modern Art, New York; Centre Georges Pompidou, Paris; San Francisco Museum of Modern Art, San Francisco; Kunstmuseum Wolfsburg; Walker Art Center, Minneapolis; Museum of Contemporary Art, Los Angeles; Tate Modern, London; and the Whitney Museum of American Art, New York.

We are pleased to present an exhibition of new paintings by Ahmed Alsoudani. This will be the artist's first exhibition with the gallery. The vibrant, large-scale paintings that will be featured draw on Alsoudani's distinct painterly vocabulary and introduce new subject matter that marks a transition in his work. Alsoudani is known for using vivid colors and fantastical figures to depict chaotic moments in which violent acts appear to have recently taken place. These figures often have human characteristics but would be more accurately described as distressed or mutilated creatures. They appear intertwined or piled on top of each other in scenes reminiscent of war-torn Middle Eastern countries, including Iraq, where Alsoudani was born and raised. Alsoudani's new paintings move away from depicting the aftermath of violence and focus instead on what precedes it, including psychological abuse and limits on personal freedoms. The shift in subject matter is accompanied by the introduction of recognizable figures and symbols. In one work, a lifelike snake appears trapped on an ornate china plate. In others, belts, chains, cages, and other restrictive items are intricately rendered. The new works also include symbols that reference a range of nationalities and cultures. What remains in the new works are the many formal signatures of Alsoudani's paintings: arresting colors portray unsettling scenes; unpainted areas reveal charcoal drawings where the artist's lines stand on their own, neither encumbered nor bolstered by color. Images are layered on top of each other, concealing and revealing specific areas, complicating the viewer's ability to understand any individual element on its own, and creating a sense of complex interrelations between divergent elements. Alsoudani was born in Baghdad and lives and works in New York City. A solo exhibition of his work, titled "Ahmed Alsoudani: Redacted," was presented in 2013 at the Phoenix Art Museum, Phoenix and the Portland Museum of Art in Portland, Maine. His work was featured in the Iraq Pavilion at the 54th Venice Biennale in 2011 and at the 2007 Gwangju Biennale. A monograph of his work was published in 2009 by Hatje Cantz Verlag.

We are pleased to present O Tópico, Chapter 27, an exhibition of new work by R. H. Quaytman. Since 2001, Quaytman has made her work using a systematic, overarching approach that conceptually resembles a book, in which each successive exhibition is a chapter. O Tópico, Chapter 27 was initiated in 2012 after the artist was invited to propose a permanent installation of paintings for Inhotim, a vast Brazilian botanical garden and art park located in Minas Gerais. Work for the chapter began with two research trips to Brazil, during which Quaytman gathered source materials and took photographs that connected to both Brazil and the ongoing painting project. Following the exhibition at Gladstone Gallery, the paintings will be permanently installed at Inhotim. They will be housed in a pavilion designed by architect Solveig Fernlund, who has been working with Quaytman on exhibition design since the late 1990s. The Gladstone installation, also designed by Fernlund, mimics the spatial orientation of the projected building. The overall shape of the pavilion is modeled on a Fibonacci sequence and the golden spiral. These patterns are also present in the gesso on many of the O Tópico panels, which are themselves confined to eight nesting sizes based on the golden ratio. This base spiral pattern triggers self-generating correspondences between divergent paintings. A circuit of pictorial events is activated through rotation, scaling, and reflection. The paintings are all on plywood with beveled edges. This chapter marks the debut of encaustic, Polyurethane, and wood relief in Quaytman's work. The photographically-based silkscreen images in the works draw on a wide array of topics or subjects, as suggested by the chapter's Portuguese title (which translates literally to "The Subject"). Some of these images are from Polaroids taken at Inhotim. In one example, an anonymous teenager poses in front of an old VW, part of an artwork by the Brazilian artist Jarbas Lopes called Troca-Troca (2002). Another artist referenced in the chapter is Dawn Kasper, shown here working on a drawing that says "chaos is a …". This particular painting continues a thread that runs through Quaytman's chapters, wherein she features portraits of fellow artists and writers. Another reference is a seed the artist found on the ground during her travels there. The following is a statement from the artist: "The ambition of this ongoing serialized system is to develop a living, usable painting model, that corresponds with how—not only what—we see. Through the unfolding itinerary of my chapters I outline an artist's art history. Brazil, in this regard, has no match in intensity—and in its applicability to what I think about. The paintings were made while researching Lygia Clark, Mira Schendel, Hélio Oiticica, Clarice Lispector, Lina Bo Bardi, João Vilanova Artigas, Elizabeth Bishop, Paulo Freire and Claude Lévi-Strauss. But these paintings are not addressed to them or even a public that knows them. They address the public I encountered at Inhotim. A public made up of crowds of school kids and families with grandmothers and teens and toddlers. But how to address this public, from the already compromised viewpoint of a US citizen, and an artist who insists on the medium specificity of painting? I tried to make paintings for children, teens and adults. But it turned out I was not up to that task, and instead it became, despite my wish for order and clarity, a kind of cosmos—it became about the world and the problem of speaking a common language without pedagogy. This sentence by Hélio Oiticica helped me understand what my paintings appeared to be doing. It goes, 'BRAZIL DIARRHEA, WHAT MATTERS: the creation of a language…'" R. H. Quaytman has been the subject of solo exhibitions at numerous museums and institutions, including The Renaissance Society, Chicago; Kunsthalle Basel, Switzerland; Neuberger Museum of Art, Purchase, NY; San Francisco Museum of Modern Art; and The Institute of Contemporary Art, Boston. Quaytman's work has been included in group exhibitions at The Museum of Modern Art, New York; The Whitney Museum of American Art, New York; The Guggenheim, New York; CCS Bard Hessel Museum of Art, Annandale-on-Hudson, NY; Sculpture Center, Long Island City, NY; MoMA PS1, Long Island City, NY; and Bergen Kunsthall, Norway. Quaytman was included in the 54th Venice Biennale in 2011 and the Whitney Biennial in 2010. The artist currently lives and works in New York. The next chapter will be held at The Tel Aviv Museum of Art in June 2015 and will be curated by Mark Godfrey.

We are pleased to present an exhibition of new work by Jean-Luc Mylayne. Thirteen photographs shot during the artist's residency at the Lannan Foundation in Bernal, New Mexico and Fort Davis, Texas will be included. The works continue Mylayne's ongoing project of photographing birds in outdoor environments as a way of highlighting the interconnectedness of the natural world. Images taken during the residency are the first that the French photographer set in American landscapes. Mylayne captures intricate creatures at peace in simple, unadorned settings. His landscapes appear in balance with the creatures that inhabit them, just as his extraordinary subjects appear in balance with their commonplace settings. The images ultimately allude to harmonies that exist throughout nature, well beyond the avian world. Especially notable is the harmony Mylayne cultivates between the birds and the camera itself. The photographer achieves this by integrating himself into an environment over a period of weeks or even months, waiting with his equipment, watching birds, and allowing them to watch him. When he feels the birds have become comfortable with him and are ready to be photographed, he shoots a single frame. In the resulting images, subjects appear calm and consenting towards the photographer's action. When still, they often make eye contact with the camera and look almost posed; when in flight, they appear to be performing for the camera, rather than flying away from it. Using an interconnected set of handmade lenses, Mylayne creates images that are simultaneously in focus and blurred, mimicking the perceptual abilities of the naked eye. Mylayne's own patience in building tools and capturing images adds another layer through which to consider the relationship between humans and animals, celerity and stasis, and other divergent facets of the natural world. Jean-Luc Mylayne was born in France in 1946. His work has been the subject of numerous solo exhibitions at institutions throughout the U.S. and abroad, including a recent exhibition at Museo Reina Sofía, Madrid; Lannan Foundation, Santa Fe; Musée d'art contemporain de Lyon; Blaffer Art Museum, University of Houston; Parrish Art Museum, Southampton, New York, among many others. Mylayne's work was featured in ILLUMInazioni curated by Bice Curiger, at the 54th Venice Biennale, 2011. In May 2015, Jean-Luc Mylayne: Mutual Regard—a major presentation of the artist's work—will be held at the Art Institute of Chicago and the Arts Club of Chicago.

We are pleased to present a solo exhibition by Allora & Calzadilla. Fault Lines will explore the overlapping mechanics of polyphonic vocal texturing, geological and sculptural displacements, and adversarial rhetorical language in a new performance-based work, featuring an original composition by Guarionex Morales-Matos. The work will feature performances by young male vocalists from the American Boychoir School and the Transfiguration Boychoir. The performances will take place on the hour Tuesday through Friday from 1 – 5 pm with an additional performance at 5:30 pm, and Saturdays hourly from 12:30 – 5:30 pm. Fault Lines consists of a group of ten stone sculptures whose formal vocabulary derives from geological faults – fractures or discontinuities in the Earth's crust – and choral risers, a set of tall and wide steps used for standing while singing. While the mineral composition of the rocks in Fault Lines took millions of years to assemble, cutting, removing, and displacing sections of their hardened mass has caused an instant and ever-lasting rupture in geological time. The resulting sculptural permutations function as choral risers, which are dispersed throughout the exhibition space and used by two boy sopranos, or trebles, to engage in a verbal duel. Trebles are known for their beautiful yet ephemeral vocal range that is subject to the inevitable effects of the dropping of the larynx, known colloquially as the "breaking of the voice." Impermanence haunts the life of the treble's voice. Its unique color, tone, and sound are limited by time. For Fault Lines, the artists have dug into the historical strata of adversarial language, excavating incendiary provocations from Cicero to Shakespeare, to contemporary political and literary figures alike, testing the functional power of these utterances, and taking note of their distinctive contours, shapes and marks. At the same time, the two boy sopranos re-animate these verbal forms of conflict in a carefully choreographed musical duel/duet where the voice escapes the letter, allowing the musical texture to take precedent over the word's intelligibility. Fault Lines explores the complex mechanics of the voice produced in the space between the body and speech, between pure sonority and linguistic meaning. Lacan considered insults a primary form of social interaction, central to the imaginary order. At once antisocial and crucial for human relations, both divisive and unifying, insults can be seen as signs of fissures in social and political civility that give rise to turmoil and conflict. Fault Lines tries to rehearse and recuperate these forms of anxiety in a public setting through a performative experiment which bears witness to the cracks that break open when geology, the voice, and emotion are put under stress. Fault Lines is performed by: American Boychoir School (Orion Bloomfield, Douglas Butler, Harry Carter, Evan Corn, Simon Gutierrez, Mak Orafidiya, Ryan Percarpio, Jonathan Pollison, Kei Sakano, Dante Soriano, and Daniel Voigt. Myles Glancy—Tour Manager, Kerry Heimann—President, Fernando Malvar-Ruiz—Litton-Lodal Music Director, Christie Starrett—General Manager) Transfiguration Boychoir (Brogan Donston, Rabindranath Felix, Richard Jimenez, Charles Rosario, Miles Simon, Carlos Tapia, Jorge Tapia, Asher Yin, and Enlun Yin. Claudia Dumschat—Choirmaster, Richard Olson—Staging Consultant) Jack Smith Theater and Performance Works 12 Rue du Grand Cerf, Brussels September 12 – November 1, 2014

We are pleased to present an exhibition of works by Jack Smith at our Brussels location. A key figure in the cultural history of downtown New York film, performance, and art, Smith began producing work in the late 1950s and became one of the most accomplished and influential artists working in the 1960s, 70s, and 80s. Through his own exploits and adventures, Smith developed a dazzling vision of the world, transforming downtown New York into a stage for his forays into photography and film. The exhibition draws its inspiration from the groundbreaking exhibition Rituals of Rented Island, which opened at the Whitney Museum of American Art in 2013. Curated by Jay Sanders, the exhibition was the first survey of Smith's performance and theater works of the 1970s, and was realized through the recreation of performance environments, and the presentation of film fragments, images, and ephemera. Theater and Performance Works will expand upon Sanders' contextualization of Smith as a harbinger for much of the New York-based performance art and experimental theater. Smith led the development of an underground theater scene in the early 1970s, staging performances in downtown lofts, storefronts, and other non-traditional spaces throughout what he referred to as the "rented island" of Manhattan. Shying away from any distinction between intimate performance and public spectacle, Smith developed a series of ongoing loft performances at his live/work space, the Plaster Foundation, which J. Hoberman described as performances that gave visitors the feeling that "what was enacted was no more or less than Smith's daily existence." Among the works on view will be a recreation of Irrational Landlordism of Bagdad, featuring elaborately crafted brassieres, a slideshow, and other materials, which were originally presented at the Cologne Art Fair in 1977; photographic stills from Smith's Plaster Foundation work Brassieres of Atlantis; props and stills from his subsequent works I Danced with a Penguin and The Secret of Rented Island; and hand drawn posters that he created to advertise upcoming performance works. Taken together the works illuminate Smith's exuberant and discerning vision of his contemporary landscape, and highlight his tremendous contribution to the legacy of experimental and performance-based art. Jack Smith was born in Columbus, Ohio in 1932 and died in New York in 1989. Smith was the subject of the exhibition Rituals of Rented Island: Object Theater, Loft Performance, and the New Psychodrama—Manhattan, 1970–1980 at the Whitney Museum of American Art in 2013 and Jack Smith Normal Love at MoMA PS1 in 2012. In 1998 PS1 mounted a retrospective of Jack Smith's work that traveled to the Warhol Museum in Pittsburgh.

This summer Gladstone Gallery has invited Galerie Neu to present the summer exhibition at our 24th Street location. The show features a series of works drawn from Galerie Neu's talented roster of artists, and will explore notions of place through works that draw upon re-purposed, urban, and readymade materials. Visitors to the exhibition will first encounter John Knight's Work, in situ, Galerie NEU/MD72/Gladstone Gallery, which will wrap around the gallery's walls. The piece, composed of the panels of Galerie Neu's original roof in their first location, and which was reinstalled in Galerie Neu's second location in Mehringdamm, has been battered by weather for ten years, conveying the passage of time and exploring the way in which environment alters a place. Through its installation at Gladstone Gallery the work draws a poignant connection between the two distinct spaces. Reena Spaulings's series The New Dealers, a collection of twenty-two oil-based portraits on panels of well-known art world professionals, will also be on view. The series, which follows the collection of works The Dealers, draws on imagery found in or reminiscent of Artforum's "Scene & Herd" column, creating a playful representation of the art world. The work provides a critique of manifestations of celebrity, a concept further explored in Tom Burr's Charlotte Shifting that will also be on view, and which is composed of printouts of reproduced portraits. In addition, a collection of installation works, sculptures, and paintings by Sergej Jensen, Kitty Kraus, Klara Lidén, Manfred Pernice, and Gedi Sibony, will be included in the exhibition, many of which take as their starting point readymade materials. Among the works on view will be Lidén's Untitled (Poster Painting), a sculptural work created from posters she has found on the street, and Sibony's The Revolving Rey, a panel from a trailer that Sibony will exhibit unaltered from its found state. Taken together, the works provide a profound reflection on space and time, offering viewers a minimalist framework through which to contemplate and understand our distinct contemporary moment. Richard Aldrich 12 Rue du Grand Cerf, Brussels April 24 – July 12, 2014

We are pleased to present an exhibition of paintings by Keith Haring. The show includes canvases and tarps painted in the 1980s, which feature the iconic imagery and motifs that Haring developed earlier in that decade. Having first gained recognition for his public work, much of which was done subversively in the New York City subway system, Haring continued throughout his career to develop a populist aesthetic. The works on view are characteristic of Haring's artistic practice, featuring a bold, bright color palette, exuberant figures, and a thoughtful use of unconventional materials. Though Haring created many works that initially appear to be celebratory and playful, he was a politically active and socially conscious artist, interested in reflecting and responding to the cultural climate in which he lived. Accordingly, his works frequently explore themes of sexuality, technology, the AIDS virus, and capitalist greed. This juxtaposition between aesthetic and subject matter is most readily apparent in his 1986 work Untitled. Painted in vibrant red and yellow, the work depicts his classic, simply outlined human figures; but unlike many of his other works in which the figures are dancing and bursting with energy, here they lie piled atop one another, with symbolic black x's over their faces, a haunting representation of the toll taken by the AIDS virus. Haring was aware of what he perceived as the potentially negative impact of technology and the media on the world around him, and frequently addressed these subjects in his work, as exemplified by several paintings on view. Haring wrote in his journal, "The problem facing modern man now…is compounded by the increasing power of technology and its misuse by those in power who wish only to control. The mentality of people who are motivated by profits at the expense of human needs is perfect for the computer." A few of the works included illustrate these musings, as they variously depict television and computer screens filled with dollar signs and people being run down by anthropomorphized technology machines. The narratives contained in these works are not necessarily overt – Haring felt that images should always be left open to interpretation – but through his works clear themes emerge, reflecting the way in which he perceived his contemporary moment. Keith Haring was born on May 4, 1958 in Reading, Pennsylvania and died at the age of thirty-one of AIDS-related illnesses in New York City. Since his death, his work has been the subject of several major solo exhibitions, including the recent major retrospectives Keith Haring: 1978 – 1982 at the Brooklyn Museum of Art and Keith Haring: The Political Line at the Musée d'Art Moderne de la Ville de Paris, which will travel to the de Young Museum in San Francisco in November 2014. In addition, Haring's work is in major private and public collections, including The Museum of Modern Art, New York; The Whitney Museum of American Art, New York; Los Angeles County Museum of Art, Los Angeles; The Art Institute of Chicago, Chicago; The Bass Museum, Miami; Centre Georges Pompidou, Paris; Ludwig Museum, Cologne; and Stedelijk Museum, Amsterdam. Peter Buggenhout Caterpillar Logic II February 28 – May 17, 2014 530 West 21st Street, New York Richard Aldrich April 24 - June 7, 2014 12 Rue du Grand Cerf, Brussels

We are pleased to present a solo exhibition by Richard Aldrich at our Brussels location. The exhibition is being presented in collaboration with dépendance, which will host a concurrent exhibition on view April 24 through May 24. The two exhibitions feature paintings, drawings, and sculptures created over the course of the past decade that highlight Aldrich's interest in the way in which objects can be used to explore the impact of time on our understanding of ourselves and the world around us. Through each work, many of which were created over the course of multiple years, or returned to after a duration of time, Aldrich provides a rich visual representation of the evolution of objects — how, as we age and change, our conception of the things close to us is altered as well. This notion is reflected in his works, which, even when finished, evince a sense of continuous becoming, suggesting the possibility of future growth and change. Eschewing a particular art-historical definition of or vantage point from which to view his art, Aldrich sees his artistic practice as a constantly evolving force. Taken as a whole, his work defies a singular style, and in his drawings, paintings, and sculptures, Aldrich is able to move effortlessly between figuration, abstraction, and representation – often combining imagery variously inspired by people and places close to him, visual artists, writers, and musicians whom he finds interesting, and experiences drawn from his everyday life. Using a variety of techniques, such as thick and thin painting, removing portions of canvas from his work, and multi-media assemblage, Aldrich has developed an artistic style that turns away from the canonical understanding of art historically, in favor of exploring new conceptual processes through which to view the contemporary world as he sees it. The works on view represent the broad spectrum of Aldrich's practice and, when taken together, read as a microcosm that encapsulates a series of moments caught in time. Among the works on view are Reality Painting #6 (A Wall in My Bedroom) part of Aldrich's 'Reality Painting Series,' a body of work that playfully adopts the art-historical idea of a series as a way to organize ideas, and which depicts scenes from Aldrich's everyday life. Also on view is Stacks, a sculpture that brings together four elements of previously exhibited sculptures to create a new complete work. This piece reflects Aldrich's interest in using re-contextualization to explore new ways in which objects can be engaged with and understood, an idea that is further expanded upon by virtue of the fact that this work was shown in his recent show at Bortolami Gallery in New York, and is now being revisited and approached anew. Among the works on view at dépendance are Untitled, a painting that is composed of a trilogy of novels from the Cyberpunk role-playing game universe Shadowrun, suspended from the canvas in mid-air, and the drawing One Kind of Sleight of Hand, which features the transparency that was used to create the painting Two bodies as One that was shown at dépendance in 2009. Aldrich was born in Hampton, Virginia, and currently lives and works in New York. He has been the subject of solo exhibitions at: San Francisco Museum of Modern Art, San Francisco, and the Contemporary Art Museum, St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri. He has also been included in group exhibitions at notable institutions including: Contemporary Arts Museum, Houston, Texas; Tokyo City Opera, Tokyo; Centro Galego de Arte Contemporánea, Santiago de Compostela, Spain; and Whitney Museum of American Art, New York. Sarah Lucas NUD NOB 515 West 24th Street March 7 – April 26, 2014 Peter Buggenhout Caterpillar Logic II 530 West 21st Street February 28 – May 17, 2014

We are pleased to present an exhibition of new work by Lari Pittman, his first at our Brussels location. Best known for his brightly colored, densely layered works, which combine readymade iconography and his own symbolic language, Pittman draws on the art historical tradition of painting, while simultaneously overturning conventional notions of perspective, subject matter, and composition. The result is a body of dazzling, intricately crafted work, shaped by a collision of figurative imagery and abstract, geometric forms. Curiosities from a Late Western Impaerium features a series of eighty-two works on paper, framed individually, but exhibited together in groups, evoking a Renaissance-style Wunderkammer, or cabinet of curiosities. Pittman often arranges his works thematically, and this exhibition reflects that interest, as the works are organized into distinct groupings of "curiosities," displayed in carefully selected arrangements, or "cabinets." As with a traditional cabinet of wonders, the exhibition explores subject matter as diverse as brain scans, manifestos and political posters, needlepoints with antidepressants, snow globes with dead architecture, highway signs warning of cannibalism, and genetically engineered plant life, presenting the works as specimens to be scrutinized and examined. Taken together, the works reveal a loose narrative thread that weaves together elements from the past with those from our contemporary reality, exploring the way history is constructed, categorized, and defined, and presenting a vision of history defined by the inventions, discoveries, and quotidian minutiae that compose everyday life. Pittman's formal practice is rooted in a visual vocabulary tied to the art historical tradition of painting, and through his distinctly contemporary works, Pittman proposes a new vision for creating a modern incarnation of the history painting. His works contain a formal and conceptual tension, revealed through the interplay of layered imagery and abstract forms, which encourage the viewer to engage with the works from multiple perspectives. As Pittman says, "Certainly the dynamic motion in a Pittman painting stimulates in me the itch to capture, and yet the act of capture remains suspended." This sense of being and becoming is articulated in Pittman's multi-faceted works through his deft incorporation of cultural signifiers from disparate time periods and international locales. Pittman was born in 1952 in Glendale, California, and currently lives and works in Los Angeles, where he is a professor at University of California Los Angeles. Pittman has been awarded the J. Paul Getty Trust Fund for the Visual Arts Fellowship Grant in Painting, National Endowment for the Arts Fellowship Grants in Painting, and the Skowhegan Medal for Painting. He participated in Documenta X (1997) and four Whitney Biennial exhibitions (1985, 1993, 1995, 1997), and has had solo exhibitions at notable institutions including: The Contemporary Art Museum, St. Louis, Missouri; Le Consortium, Dijon, France; Institute of Contemporary Art, London; Centre d'Art Contemporain, Geneva; Los Angeles County Museum of Art, Los Angeles; Corcoran Museum, Washington DC; Contemporary Arts Museum, Houston; and Villa Arson, Nice, France. Sarah Lucas NUD NOB 515 West 24th Street March 7 – April 26, 2014 Peter Buggenhout Caterpillar Logic II 530 West 21st Street February 28 – April 19, 2014

We are pleased to present a solo exhibition by Sarah Lucas, her first US exhibition in nearly a decade. Since the 1990s, Lucas has been working with found objects and readily available materials to create works imbued with a distinctive and provocative visual language. Drawing on art historical references, cultural stereotypes, and the British tabloid culture, Lucas creates works that both directly and through subtle innuendo, challenge our conception of gender, sexuality, and identity. This show features a series of large-scale bronze and cast-concrete sculptures displayed variously on pedestals, and, at other times, installed directly on the floor. Characteristic of Lucas's practice, the works simultaneously suggest multiple forms, as with the two monumental bronze works Florian and Kevin, which appear as both oversized vegetables and phallic-shaped sculptures. By confronting viewers with objects that are at once familiar and disorienting, Lucas proposes a reading of her work that seeks to subtly subvert socially constructed norms. Human anatomy has long fascinated Lucas, and even in her earliest works she substituted furniture for human body parts, often adding a suggestion of genitalia. In her recent work, the form of the phallus in particular has been a recurring visual motif, one that she sees as "a perfectly self-contained sculptural form, 'pregnant' with meaning." The exhibition further investigates her interest in the phallus with two cast-concrete works, Eros and Priapus, which are displayed in recumbent positions, resting on pedestals crafted out of crushed cars. Referencing the Greek gods of love and fertility, respectfully, Lucas uses the titling of her work to infuse the sculptures with a humorous gesture. Language and its potential for both poetic alliteration and sly allusion is central to Lucas's works, and her titles often draw on slang, puns, and historical references to invoke allusions that are variously erotic, romantic, and funny. In addition to the large-scale works, a series of lithe, bronze sculptures composed of abstracted, biomorphic forms, are also on view. Depicting human-like figures caught in various states of repose, the sculptures stand in stark contrast to the large, masculine sculptures that surround them. Referencing the art historical tradition of British Modernist sculpture, the works provide a tactile and immediate experience for visitors, yet simultaneously hint at the ephemeral. Composed of corporeal fragments and organic forms, the sculptures intimate a sense of absence, suggesting an innate fragility within their outwardly sturdy form. Born in Holloway, London in 1962, Lucas has been the subject of numerous major solo exhibitions both nationally and internationally including: Secession, Vienna; Whitechapel Gallery, London; Henry Moore Institute, Leeds, U.K.; Kunsthalle Krems, Austria; Kunstverein Hamburg, Germany; Tate Liverpool, United Kingdom; Museum of Cycladic Arts, Athens; Kunsthalle Zurich; Milton Keynes Gallery, U.K.; Museum Ludwig, Cologne; and Museum Boymans-van-Beuningen, Holland. Lucas's work was also included in the Venice Biennale in 2007 and 2013. Her work is currently the subject of a solo exhibition at Tramway in Glasgow. Peter Buggenhout Caterpillar Logic II 530 West 21st Street February 28 – April 19 2014 Lari Pittman Curiosities from a Late Western Impaerium 12 Rue du Grand Cerf, Brussels March 13 – April 16, 2014

We are pleased to present a solo exhibition with Belgian artist Peter Buggenhout. Working with industrial and found materials, Buggenhout creates large-scale sculptural installations, which, upon first glance, appear to be abandoned structures or remnants from a disaster site. Taking as his medium what he describes as abject matter – everyday materials that have been disassociated from their original use and repurposed – Buggenhout creates looming structures, whose formal complexity and clear, predetermined, internal logic, is revealed only upon closer inspection. The exhibition, Caterpillar Logic II, features two large-scale installations, The Blind Leading the Blind #66 and The Blind Leading the Blind #67, which have been created using old building and industrial materials and garbage that are blanketed in a layer of dust. The title of the works, which Buggenhout uses for all of his dust works, is drawn from the work by Pieter Bruegel the Elder of the same name, which depicts a group of blind men leading one another through a village. Like Buggenhout's work, this painting shows a scene that at first appears to be chaotic – filled with groping, directionless figures – but upon closer inspection is revealed to have an internal logic and process, which the men have determined as they journey from town to town. This notion of a complex system becoming clear only upon closer examination is central to Buggenhout's work, and, as the exhibition title suggests, echoes the way in which there is an innate, yet invisible logic to the butterfly form that a caterpillar will eventually assume. Buggenhout creates his intricately built assemblages with the intention of undermining any semblance of symbolism that could be suggested by the form of an individual material. His interest in dust grows out of this formal logic, as he feels that dust is a material that has no meaning in and of itself, but which has the ability to change the form and meaning of things, since it is drawn from the detritus of people, objects, and places. As he says, "Materials I work with are very abject. The abject as described by Georges Bataille is a material that is withdrawn from its original state and has lost its form and meaning because of it…And this uncertainness completely wipes away the symbolic approach of the work and the material…I believe that all these different aspects and layers in the work are openings for different interpretations but I never give a clue. We all project what we see." By removing any symbolic qualities, Buggenhout focuses the visitor's attention on the work, enabling it to be considered only within the context of itself. Taken together, the works create an immersive and otherworldly environment, inviting viewers to investigate the monumental forms before them. Peter Buggenhout was born in 1963 in Dendermonde, Belgium, and currently lives and works in Gent, Belgium. Buggenhout has been the subject of solo exhibitions and participated in numerous group exhibitions at notable institutions including: MoMA PS1, New York; Palais De Tokyo, Paris; Art Unlimited, Basel, Switzerland; Frankfurter Kunstverein, Germany; Kunstverein Hannover, Germany; Herzliya Biennial 2011, Israel; Kunstraum Dornbirn, Austira; De Pont Foundation, Tilburg, Netherlands, La Maison Rouge, Paris; and Museum of Old and New Art, Tasmania. Ricci Albenda Yakkity Yak 12 Rue du Grand Cerf, Brussels January 24 – March 1, 2014

We are pleased to present the first exhibition with Ricci Albenda at our Brussels location. Throughout his career, Albenda has taken a longstanding interest in the written word, utilizing letters to explore the ways in which language is simultaneously a visual, personal, communal, and intellectual entity. Albenda's earliest paintings feature words or phrases superimposed over images, which combine language and imagery to create an abstract narrative. Over time, Albenda began to take a more directed interest in the language component of the work itself. By removing the imagery, Albenda was able to explore the compelling subtlety, precision, and simplicity of a black and white text, inspiring him to create works that contain only letters, foregrounded as the central image. Yakkity Yak features a series of Albenda's word paintings, which display familiar phrases and sentences, such as "I like you." and "Shut up!" Created on canvases of varying size, the works, when taken together, distort the viewer's perspective, as their shifting scales create an illusion of distance between the galleries. This intentional exploration of the way that people understand and perceive space evidences Albenda's ongoing interest in creating architectural interventions and sculptures that distort surfaces and initiate trompe l'oeil effects. The black of the text contrasts sharply against the white background, creating a dazzling optical effect that plays with the spatial relationships between the words, their backgrounds, and the gallery walls. This is the first exhibition for Albenda in which every painting was conceived of to include phrases, rather than a mixture of single and multiple word works. This formal decision arose from an interest in capturing what Albenda perceives as the cathedral-like nature of the space, and a desire to create works that highlight the great verticality of the environment. Favoring vertical and square canvases over the horizontal ones that he more typically uses, Albenda feels that multiple word works were more conducive to his chosen canvas and better reflected the distinct nature of the gallery. While the works, upon first glance, appear to be black text on white canvas, as viewers acclimate to the exhibition a subtle shading is revealed, which progresses throughout the exhibition: from warm tones inspired by the colors of daybreak; to multicolored washes reminiscent of the ever-changing light reflected off of trees, buildings, and other objects; to pale blues reminiscent of an open sky. From the vantage point of the last room, the viewer will be confronted by the spectrum-like effect of the works taken together as whole. Ricci Albenda lives and works in New York. Albenda has been included in notable exhibitions at major institutions including at the: Museum of Modern Art, New York; Guggenheim Museum, New York; Tel Aviv Museum, Israel; Brooklyn Museum of Art, New York; Institute of Contemporary Art, Boston; MoMA PS1, New York; Site Santa Fe, New Mexico; Contemporary Arts Center, Cincinnati, Ohio; the New Museum of Contemporary Art, New York; Museo d'Arte Contemporanea, Torino, Italy; and the Stedelijk Museum voor Actuele Kunst, Gent, Belgium.

We are pleased to announce an exhibition of new work by Robert Bechtle. Bechtle's paintings, watercolors, and drawings reflect with startling accuracy his vision of contemporary America. Throughout his career, Bechtle has returned to motifs such as the streets of his native San Francisco, automobiles, self-portraits, and his family to portray the American landscape. Drawing on the art-historical tradition of photorealism, Bechtle creates complex compositions that flawlessly depict fragments of everyday life. For this exhibition, Bechtle will present a series of watercolors and charcoal drawings of San Francisco's tree and car-lined streets, as well as a number of self-portraits. Often using a photograph as his point of departure, Bechtle explores different ways of framing an image, cropping scenes to include only part of the presumable subject matter or orienting the works slightly off-center – compositional effects that serve to heighten the impact of the scenes he is portraying. In several works, he enhances the hilly topography of his neighborhood, Portrero Hill, by closely cropping the picture and omitting any sky or horizon line, thus complicating the viewers' ability to orient themselves in the work. Often moving the supposed subject of his work – including cars, trees, and row houses – to the margins, he subtly challenges both our understanding of what the subject is, as well as the assumption that the composition's center should be prioritized over the edges of the work. Bechtle's new works continue to expand upon his ongoing interest in capturing the distilled and poignant moments of a world caught in constant motion. The artist's keen attention to detail and his emphasis on even the smallest aspects of a scene inspire viewers to become more aware of the nuances of their everyday surroundings. Through this exhibition of works on paper, viewers are invited to engage with another, less familiar aspect of Bechtle's career as one of America's preeminent realists. Robert Bechtle was born in 1932 in San Francisco, where he continues to live and work. In 2004, the San Francisco Museum of Modern Art organized a lauded retrospective of his work that traveled to the Modern Art Museum of Fort Worth, Texas, and the Corcoran Gallery of Art in Washington, DC. His paintings have been included in major group exhibitions internationally since the 1960s, including "The Artist as His Subject," Museum of Modern Art, New York; Documenta 5, Kassel, Germany; "The American Century: Art and Culture, 1950-2000," Whitney Museum of American Art, New York; "Les Anneés Pop," Centre Pompidou, Paris; and "Infinite Painting," Villa Manin Centro d'Art Contemporanea, Codroipo, Italy. Bechtle was awarded the Francis J. Greenberger Award for continued excellence in painting in 2003. Ricci Albenda Yakkity Yak 12 Rue du Grand Cerf, Brussels January 24 – March 1, 2014 Opening January 24, 6–8 pm Cyprien Gaillard Today Diggers, Tomorrow Dickens 530 West 21st Street, New York November 9, 2013 – February 1, 2014

We are pleased to present an exhibition of new work by Rosemarie Trockel. For over thirty years, Trockel has disputed the fixed nature of representation through her work, exploring meaning as an ever-shifting construction through the myriad forms that comprise her practice. Though Trockel has consistently resisted an explicit stylistic signature, certain recurring themes weave throughout her oeuvre, most notably notions of female identity and feminism, the disjunction between fine art and craftsmanship, and the varying presence or anonymity of the artist traceable in a physical object. Displacing materials from their original context and using them as both medium and art form, Trockel brings forth aspects of the unknown, the humorous, the surprising, and the bewildering in her knit works, ceramics, sculptures, drawings, videos, and collages. The exhibition features a series of new wool paintings and wall sculptures, both of which demonstrate an ongoing interest in juxtaposition and allusion, themes that pervade much of Trockel's work. With a nod to the formal compositions of twentieth century abstract painting, the wool works convey a non-figurative painterly surface, but, upon closer inspection, the "brushstrokes" reveal themselves to be carefully placed pieces of yarn. Wool has been considered Trockel's signature material since she first utilized the medium to create a series of machine-knit wool works in the 1980s. These new wool paintings, which feature bold horizontal and vertical stripes of color as well as monochromatic compositions, are installed salon-style, encouraging new readings of form and abstraction, and bringing texture and three-dimensionality to the picture plane. A new series of wall sculptures made of acrystal, Perspex, and acrylic paint are also on view. Applying casts of different cuts of meat to transparent, curved, carrier panels, Trockel wryly acknowledges the gravitation towards the use of unconventional materials in twenty-first century art practice. Creating works in which the surprising and non-traditional process of making is utterly concealed, Trockel inverts our traditional conception of an art form, mixing craft and production to elicit new modes of viewing. The exhibition also includes Copy Me, a large-scale cast steel and plastic sculpture in the shape of two adjoined sofas, one an exact replica of the other. Creating a distressed surface to suggest years of wear and tear, Trockel encourages the viewer to see this sculpture as the banal domestic object it imitates, and then playfully invites the viewer to mimic it. This tradition of copying is fundamental to Trockel's work, a process that she engages in repeatedly in an effort to challenge predetermined conceptions of representation. Undermining art historical connotations with micro-interventions, subtle manipulations, and sometimes nearly invisible gestures, Trockel subverts our preconceived notions of objecthood, trading in paint for yarn, replacing the traditional human subject with an animal one, and turning everyday objects into artworks. Rosemarie Trockel was born in Schwerte, West Germany in 1952 and now lives and works in Cologne. Her work is currently on view in "Il Palazzo Enciclopedico" at the 55th Venice Biennale. Most recently, Trockel was the subject of two major solo exhibitions, "A Cosmos," which originated at Museo Nacional Centro de Arte Reina Sofía, Madrid and traveled to the New Museum, New York and Serpentine Gallery, London; and "Flagrant Delight," which was presented at Wiels, Brussels, Culturegest, Lisbon, and Museion, Bolzano, Italy. Trockel has had solo exhibitions at numerous notable institutions including: Kunstmuseum Basel, Switzerland; Museu Paco das Artes São Paulo, Brazil; Museum Ludwig, Cologne, Germany; The Drawing Center, New York; and Centre Georges Pompidou, Paris. Trockel represented Germany at the Venice Biennale in 1999 and participated in Documenta in 1997 and 2012. Cyprien Gaillard "Today Diggers, Tomorrow Dickens" 530 West 21st Street November 9, 2013 – January 30, 2014 Gedi Sibony 12 Rue du Grand Cerf, Brussels October 26 – December 20, 2013

We are pleased to present our first exhibition with Cyprien Gaillard, "Today Diggers, Tomorrow Dickens." For this ambitious and complex presentation, Gaillard has created two complementary bodies of sculptural works that explore notions of regeneration, ruination, and decay, turning his eye to the relationship between evolution and erosion – a thread that weaves through much of his work. Navigating the concept of the altered readymade through an anthropological lens, Gaillard has incorporated processed natural and industrial materials to achieve an equilibrium that reflects the way in which our society simultaneously progresses and reverts in the realm of the bleak. Inspiration for the exhibition title came from a series of mural slogans used to conceal a raw building site, home of the future performing arts center in Beverly Hills. Intended as a playful tag suggesting the inconvenience caused by ongoing construction as being an experience worth enduring, the slogan struck Gaillard as ironic. As a Dickensian universe connotes poverty, hardship, and ruin, Gaillard thought that the message, rather than suggesting progression and growth, hinted at a reversion to darker times. The works that Gaillard has created for the exhibition evoke this contradiction, inviting viewers to consider the ways in which our vision of progress simultaneously leads us back toward a more dismal landscape and unyielding reality. On the first floor of the exhibition, visitors encounter a series of sculptures ranging from small-scale to monumental. Entering the gallery as if in reverse, viewers are presented with an opposing perspective of the sculptural works – a series of excavator machine parts, removed from their conventional setting. Placed directly on the floor, with the teeth once used for digging now acting as a sculptural anchor, the excavator heads are set with deftly carved pieces of onyx, inserted where the buckets once attached to the machines. Sourced from a variety of locations, the excavator heads have been washed and waxed, their resilience to the outdoors rendered defunct by the process necessary to preserve them as sculptural works. Once part of a machine used as a means for destruction, to encourage rejuvenation through building, these pieces, now preserved, begin a fossilization process of their own. Though the diggers have caused destruction in their lifetime, in their arrested manner Gaillard has preserved them, imbuing them with new purpose. Bringing together a diverse range of material, Gaillard suggests a certain geographical mapping within the works. The white and yellow minerals have been sourced from Iran and Utah, respectively, and together with the machinery, found in California and made by Esco, Caterpillar, Bobcat etc. – American companies with international reach – they evoke the global nature of a tendency towards endless progress and the necessary ruination implicit in that process. The notion of conceptual mapping, as well as more formal decisions, act as points of connection between the two series of works on view. The color yellow persists as paint residue on the excavator heads and is reflected again in the yellow-hued banded calcite, which, though mined by similar machinery through a process of destruction, now rests in perfect equilibrium in the grip of the sculpture – an essential part of the work. The color yellow is present in the body of work on view on the gallery's second floor as well, which features a series of sculptural works made out of back issues of National Geographic magazine, whose covers are outlined in yellow. These works are composed of pages from the magazine, cut with one single artistic gesture, and then folded together to hold them in place. Though they evoke a collage-like appearance, the works are held together simply by the tension incurred on the paper during the cutting and folding process – a tension that is echoed in the stress caused to the onyx held in the grip of the excavator heads. Gaillard sifted through copies of the magazine from the past fifty years, selecting individual pages from various issues, and bringing these disparate pages together to create a geographical map within the confines of each folding on view. Each work is created out of five different pages, whose full nature is concealed by virtue of the folding process. Selecting pages of issues from different decades, Gaillard has brought together fragments from distinct historical periods, distilling a particular moment in time. By putting these pages side by side with one another, Gaillard has created a dialogue within each piece, navigating time and space to create one unified present vision. Placed like scientific specimens beneath vitrines, the works are presented as small portals into history – one that is both real and contained on the pages, and one that is fabricated by virtue of the disparate pairings of the pages. Taken together, these two series of works reflect Gaillard's longstanding interest in artifact and preservation. Though the excavator heads and the magazines were both once lively tools used by people for creation and learning, they now stand as objects frozen in time – still relics that reflect a dystopian vision of our society. Gaillard was born in Paris and lives and works in Berlin and New York. He has been the subject of solo exhibitions at a number of major institutions, including: MoMA PS1, New York; Hammer Museum, Los Angeles; Schinkel Pavillon, Berlin; Fondazione Nicola Trussardi, Milan, Italy; Kunst-Werke Institute for Contemporary Art, Berlin; Centre Georges Pompidou, Paris; and Kunsthalle Basel, Basel, Switzerland. Rosemarie Trockel 515 West 24th Street November 9 – December 21, 2013 Gedi Sibony 12 Rue du Grand Cerf, Brussels October 26 – December 20, 2013

We are pleased to present an exhibition of new work by Gedi Sibony. For this exhibition Sibony presents a selection of eight sculptural works that he has extricated from the world, as well as one progressively built up in the studio. Three pieces have been removed from tractor-trailer vans, where the corporate name of the previous owner has been painted out by the second owner's use as a storage trailer. Painting out the specific name in the most efficient way possible leaves evidence of a purposeful hand, and Sibony lets happenstance thrive on its own--a space once identified is now set free. In the next rooms sit a more domestic mise-en-scène: a half painted Victorian radiator migrates away from the wall and three framed works with the previous artwork reversed expose various pragmatic taping operations of the framer. A crushed birdcage hangs in the background and in the center, flecked in the gold of all the other works, is a shrouded figurine -- the entire affair a magic twinkle in her eye. Throughout his career, Sibony has played with the formal and psychological expectation of a gallery exhibition. This exhibition reflects his continued meditation on this concept, heightening the intention of ready-made objects, and exploring the possibilities for what constitutes an artwork Sibony lives and works in New York. He has an upcoming show at Douglas Hyde Gallery, Dublin, and been the subject of solo exhibitions at Culturgest, Lisbon; Contemporary Art Museum St. Louis; St. Louis, Missouri; Kunsthalle St. Gallen, St. Gallen, Switzerland; FRAC Champagne-Ardenne, Reims, France; and Midway Contemporary Art, Minneapolis, Minnesota. He recently curated "In The Still Epiphany" at the Pulitzer Foundation in St. Louis, Missouri. His work has also been featured in numerous group exhibitions including "Contemporary Art From the Collection," Museum of Modern Art, New York; "Collaborations & Interventions," CCA Kunsthalle Andratx, Mallorca, Spain; "the language of less (then & now)," Museum of Contemporary Art, Chicago, "Universes in Universe," Astrup Fearnley Museum Collection at the Sao Paulo Biennial, Sao Paulo; "Unmonumental," New Museum for Contemporary Art, New York; "Day for Night," the 2006 Whitney Biennial at the Whitney Museum of American Art, New York; and "Greater New York 2005," MoMA PS1, New York. Rosemarie Trockel 515 West 24th Street November 9 – December 21, 2013 Opening November 8, 6 – 8 pm Cyprien Gaillard "Today Dickens, Tomorrow Diggers" 530 West 21st Street November 9, 2013 – January 30, 2014 Opening November 8, 6 – 8 pm

We are pleased to announce an exhibition of new work by Jan Dibbets. Initially trained as a painter, in the 1960s Dibbets turned to photography, drawing on the rich tradition of Dutch painting, and its emphases on light, structure, and nature. Dibbets developed a painterly approach to photography, challenging the assumption that photography produces only objective reproductions of reality, and exploring the possibilities for a photograph as an art object. Dibbets went on to create photographic series such as "Perspective Corrections," which explored the dichotomy between the illusion the camera creates and the reality that the eye sees, laying the foundation for what eventually became recognized as conceptual art. In the mid-seventies, Dibbets pushed the boundaries of the photographic medium even further, becoming the first artist to recognize large-scale color photography as a legitimate medium. The exhibition on view at Gladstone Gallery will feature a recent series of Dibbets' Colorstudies, large-scale works that depict detailed views of car hoods. The works have been created from Dibbets' original materials from the 1970s, using modern technology and contemporary techniques to better achieve what Dibbets originally envisioned for the Colorstudies works. Interested in the way a close-cropped view of an object can obscure its representational value, Dibbets often takes as his subject scenes from the everyday, including landscapes, windows, and automobiles, using mundane subject matter to create new modes of perspective and understanding. Exploring the element of abstraction inherent in reality, the Colorstudies depict fragments of the natural landscape reflected in the cars' hoods, highlighting the way familiar objects can become obscured by the camera's gaze. Cast in glossy, bright hues, the works reflect Dibbets' interest in manipulating color to further question the relationship between representation and reality. Jan Dibbets lives and works in Amsterdam. He has had solo exhibitions at major institutions, including: Musée d'Art Moderne de la Ville de Paris; Miami Art Museum, Miami; Van Abbemuseum, Eindhoven, Netherlands; Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, New York; Walker Art Center, Minneapolis; Detroit Institute of the Arts, Detroit; Fundacion Espai Poblenau, Barcelona; Stedelijk Museum, Amsterdam; and Museum Haus Lange, Krefeld, Germany.

We are pleased to exhibit new work by Damián Ortega. Beginning his career as a political cartoonist, Ortega has taken a longstanding interest in teasing out the underlying social and political narrative embedded in even the most mundane of materials, from tools to automobiles. Deconstructing familiar objects, Ortega creates new spatial arrangements with the materials, enabling each component to be analyzed and reconsidered. Ortega is fascinated by systems, and a formal interest in analyzing the relationship between individual parts and their larger whole runs through the artist's work. Creating works that are at once playful and deeply provocative, Ortega investigates the way things come apart, yet remain fundamentally connected to one another. For this exhibition, which includes sculpture, installation art, and photographic works, Ortega turns his eye to the concept of language, exploring the ways in which it is fragmented and deconstructed. The main gallery space features a large-scale installation composed of 25 twisted steel sculptures hanging from the ceiling in five grid-like rows. Spotlights hang above each element of the installation, casting a shadow on the ground in the shape of letters of the alphabet. Proposing the idea of creating a new alphabet or language, Ortega has created a work that, like language, is composed of individual elements, yet reads as a fluid whole, with each sculpture evidencing connectivity to its surrounding components. Damián Ortega was born in 1967 in Mexico and currently lives and works in Mexico City and Berlin. He has had solo exhibitions at notable international venues including: the Barbican, London; the Institute of Contemporary Art, Boston; Tate Modern, London; Kunsthalle Basel; Institute of Contemporary Art, Philadelphia; and Le Centre Pompidou, Paris. His work has been part of major group exhibitions including: Art Basel 41 (2010), the 27th São Paulo Biennial (2006); the 4th Berlin Biennial (2006); and the 50th Venice Biennale (2003). His work is currently on view in "Damian Ortega: The Blast and Other Embers" at the Cleveland Museum of Art, and in "Il Palazzo Enciclopedico / The Encyclopedic Palace," curated by Massimiliano Gioni as part of the 55th Venice Biennale.

We are pleased to present the gallery's first solo exhibition at our Brussels location with Swiss artist Claudia Comte. Drawing on myriad sources, from architecture and design to nature and popular culture, Comte creates paintings and sculptural works that playfully explore the relationship between material, space, and form. Comte began painting at an early age, producing her first formal series in 2001. Titled, "Our Most Wonderful Years," the paintings are photorealistic portraits of her childhood, depicting family vacations, birthday parties, and other memorable moments from her youth. Comte has since developed a formal style that tends towards abstraction, bringing together geometric forms, amorphous shapes, and figurative elements, to create a diverse body of work that incorporates multiple media. Often creating site-specific works, Comte investigates the way artwork can transform a space, combining surprising materials, textures, and colors to turn a static room into a dynamic environment. The exhibition comprises three series of works, which are installed in a collage-like manner, nearly covering the walls and filling the floor space to create an immersive environment for visitors. The first series, a collection of ten wooden sculptures carved from the trunk of an eighty year-old cherry tree, represents a continuation of Comte's ongoing work with wood. Comte manipulates the wood with a chainsaw, typically in the place in the woods in which it was found, creating a sculpture that develops a type of personage or character as she works on it. For this most recent series, which is mounted on pedestals that are half glossy and half burned, the tubular sculptures have a letter-like quality, and, taken together read as an abstracted alphabet. The second series, a collection of "Cocktail Paintings," are inspired by Comte's favorite bar in Berlin, a place known for its extremely precise drink recipes. Composed of eight brightly painted canvases, the "Cocktail Paintings" represent a melding of painting and sculpture. Comte paints the eight individual canvases as though they were one work, then separates and reassembles them, creating a modular work that can take on a new form each time it is installed. Finally, the exhibition includes a collection of "Circle" paintings, composed on a white circular canvas and painted with black acrylic. Each work consists of one gesture, which appears simple, yet hints at a larger meaning. Inspired by the cartoons of her childhood, in which a single black line could convey numerous movements, the works explore the way in which a simple brush stroke can express complexity. Comte was born in Grancy, Switzerland, and now lives and works in Berlin. She has been the subject of solo exhibitions at Centre d'art de Fribourg, Fribourg, Switzerland; Centre Culturel Suisse, Paris, France; and the Swiss Institute of Rome, Italy. She has also been included in notable group exhibitions at: Kunsthaus Glarus, Glarus, Switzerlandl Aargauer Kunsthaus, Aarau, Switzerland; La Salle de Bains, Lyon, France; and the Musée Cantonal des Beaux-Arts, Lausanne, Switzerland.

We are pleased to present "Mixed Message Media," a group exhibition curated by Neville Wakefield. Featuring work by 15 artists, the exhibition explores the mutable nature of materials, highlighting the way in which even the most objective realities contain an inherent subjectivity. For this exhibition Wakefield brings together artists from around the world, many of whom use non-traditional materials in an unexpected and unconventional manner, to create an immersive environment that investigates the ways in which materials are imbued with inherent meaning. Wakefield says of the exhibition: "Just as yes is always yes and sometimes no, so the same rule applies to the materials of everyday life. Concrete is always concrete, but it is sometimes plastic too. Or, as my youngest son once remarked of Britney Spears, 'It's not just that she's crazy, she's nuts too.' This is our reality tunnel, a term Timothy Leary first coined in his 1977 book Neuropolitique: 'The gene-pool politics which monitor power struggles among terrestrial humanity are transcended into this info-world, i.e. seen as static, artificial charades. One is neither coercively manipulated into another's territorial reality nor forced to struggle against it with reciprocal game-playing (the usual soap opera dramatics). One simply elects, consciously, whether or not to share the others reality tunnel.' Here truth is never anywhere other than in the eye of the beholder and the medium is always the mixed message." "Mixed Message Media" features works that represent a broad range of practices, including video, site-specific installation, painting, and sculpture. Among the works on view will be a five-part concrete sculpture by Lara Favaretto, each part of which captures a gesture meant to convey a single mood or feeling; a site-specific environment by Claudia Comte, which will include a series of sculptural works and a video; and a sculptural intervention by Renata Lucas, installed on the floor of the gallery. The artists included in the exhibition are: Darren Bader, Claudia Comte, Lara Favaretto, Piero Golia, Bruno Jakob, Jirí Kovanda, Tony Labat, Renata Lucas, Dylan Lynch, Cinthia Marcelle, Dominic Nurre, Alex Perweiler, Wilfredo Prieto, Zachary Susskind, and Kaari Upson.

We are pleased to present an exhibition of new paintings by Magnus Plessen. Drawing on the formal techniques of painting to push the boundaries of the medium, Plessen uses defined brushstrokes, and a process of adding paint to the canvas and subsequently subtracting it to create spatial depth in his work. Incorporating abstract forms and figurative elements into each composition, Plessen investigates the conflict between the two modes of representation. Rather than evaluate abstraction from a painterly perspective, Plessen explores the way in which abstraction reflects our life experiences and the way we view our surrounding environment, as we move variously between states of disorientation and confusion to moments of clarity and understanding. Painted in a palette of bright, vivid colors, Plessen's newest body of work features abstract, nearly geometrical elements, combined with fragments of body parts that appear where one might otherwise expect a human figure. Plessen conceived of the series after reading Michel Foucault's "Manet and the Object of Painting," in which Foucault argues that Manet is the forerunner of abstraction. Critical of Foucault's thesis, Plessen created a painting based on Manet's Dans la Serre, composing a visual counter-argument to Foucault's point. Rather than assume that the flatness of Manet's work led to inevitable abstraction, Plessen explores the way in which the two-dimensional nature of the work can be transformed and advanced, leading to a sense of three-dimensional movement in the painting instead. Plessen describes the experience of revisiting Dans la Serre while reading Foucault's essay: "By identifying the hands as horizontal and vertical orientations on a two-dimensional surface, the coherence of the scene is severely disturbed, the unengaged conversation between the two figures becomes unimportant. Body parts become independent of their place or function in the context of this image – jumping out of the dense green background moving around the point where they are attached to the canvas through the hands pointing down and left." Moving away from the notion of using figuration to create an illusion on the canvas, Plessen seeks new ways of conveying the three-dimensional on a two-dimensional plane. Inverting the traditional concept of ascribing a single orientation to each work, Plessen has created paintings that can be rotated, transforming the relationship between subject and object, and inviting viewers to reconsider their perspective. As the orientation of the work changes, so too does the formal composition of the painting, creating a sense of dynamic movement within each work. Magnus Plessen was born in 1967 in Hamburg, Germany. His work has been the subject of numerous solo exhibitions at various venues including: the Art Institute of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois; Kunstsammlung Nordrhein-Westfallen, Düsseldorf, Germany; MoMA PS1, New York, and the Centre Pompidou, Paris. In 2003, his work was included in the 50th Venice Biennale.

We are pleased to present "soul," an exhibition of new sculptures by Ugo Rondinone. Rondinone has long embraced a fluidity of forms and media. Taken as a whole, his work represents a complex network of responses to social and physical structures. By allowing himself the freedom to work within a wide variety of disciplines and media, Rondinone creates the conditions necessary to explore a broad emotional range. His work has become widely recognized for its ability to channel both psychological expressiveness and profound insight into the human condition. For the series of sculptures included in "soul," bluestone – the material out of which the works are made – has been rough-cut into blocks, which are stacked atop one another to form the human figure. The methods by which the stone has been worked are apparent to the viewer, and have not been obscured by subsequent handling. Visible traces, including drill-holes and split structures, evidence the work done at the quarry, where the blocks were removed from the ground. The work evinces the true nature of the stone: heavy and coarse material, marked by wind, weather, and corrosion. The simple presence and natural surface of the sculpture contrasts with the artificial surface of the poured concrete pedestals. The exhibition itself functions as a sort of hall-of-mirrors turned inwards. The stone figure is repeated and reflected in several scales, and installed in an immersive raw concrete environment. The exhibition is complemented by "Human Nature," a large-scale installation presented by the Public Art Fund. Nine 16 to 20-foot tall stone sculptures are on view now through June 7 in the plaza at Rockefeller Center. Born in 1964 in Brunnen, Switzerland, Rondinone has recently been the subject of solo exhibitions at: the Museum of Cycladic Art, Athens, Greece; Kunst Historisches Museum Wien, Wien, Vienna; Museum Dhondt Dhaenens, Deurle, Belgium; and Museo de Arte Contemporáneo de Castilla y León, France. This year, Rondinone will have solo exhibitions at Museum Leuven, Brussels, Belgium, and at the Art Institute of Chicago. In 2007, Rondinone represented Switzerland at the 52nd Venice Biennial and curated "The Third Mind" at Palais de Tokyo in Paris. He currently lives and works in New York.

We are pleased to present an exhibition of new and early works by Marisa Merz. Known for her unusual use of materials, such as copper wire, clay, and wax, Merz makes sculptures and drawings that reflect a poetic sensibility, which delicately entwines her vision of art and life. The exhibition features painting, sculpture, and works on paper, and highlights Merz's pioneering role as a central figure and the only female artist in the Arte Povera movement. The Arte Povera movement, which formed during the late 1960s and was given a formal name by Germano Celant in 1967, called into question established ideas and assumptions about the processes and materials that had come to define the Western artistic practice. Merz, along with the other innovative, seminal artists associated with Arte Povera, including her late husband Mario Merz, began using everyday and organic materials in an effort to subvert the elite status that the art object had attained in its role in the consumerism-based culture of advanced capitalism. Using abstracted, organic forms, Merz creates intimate portraits and sculptures that insist on subjectivity and ever-shifting meaning, espousing her belief that every shape must be capable of transforming into another shape. Merz attests that she draws no distinction between her art and her life, and her work advances a critical framework that draws on traditional customs associated with female domesticity, using craft techniques and unconventional materials to explore the infinite possibilities of the everyday. Throughout Merz's oeuvre, the figure of the face emerges – a symbol of the eternal human spirit. Composed of fleeting arabesque lines, Merz's figures are disconnected from any social or narrative context. Instead, each reveals a ghostly configuration of abstracted features that defy expressions of individual identity, fixing each form in a state of suspended time. Marisa Merz was born in 1926 in Turin, Italy. She has been the subject of numerous solo exhibitions at museums including: Centre Internationale d'art et du Paysage, ÎIe de Vassivière, France; Museo d'Arte Contemporanea Donnaregina, Naples, Italy; Stedelijk Museum, Amsterdam; Kunstmuseum Winterthur, Switzerland; and the Centre Georges Pompidou, Paris, among other international venues. Selected group exhibitions include: Kunstmuseum Liechtenstein; CCS Bard/Hessel Museum of Art, Annandale-on-Hudson, New York; Tate Modern, London; and the Hirschhorn Museum, Washington, D.C. This summer she will be included in "Il Palazzo Enciclopedico/The Encyclopedic Palace" at the 2013 La Biennale di Venezia, curated by Massimiliano Gioni.

We are pleased to present an exhibition of Hanne Darboven's multipart work Kalendergeschichten, which is installed at our Brussels gallery. Darboven, a German conceptual artist, is best known for her large-scale, minimalist works, and her meditation on time, a theme fundamental to her practice. In the mid-1960s, Darboven moved to New York, where she grew interested in conceptual art and developed a fascination with numerical sequences. This interest became foundational to her work, and much of her work evidences a visual vocabulary derived from numerical sequences of four to six digits, drawn from the standard Gregorian calendar. Of her use of numbers Darboven said, "I only use numbers because it is a way of writing without describing…I choose numbers because they are so constant, confined, and artistic. Numbers are probably the only real discovery of mankind." Kalendergeschichten features a series of 212 drawings made in the 1970s and framed in groups of four, which are displayed wrapped around the walls of the gallery. Emblematic of Darboven's calendar works, this piece provides a system for meditating on the passage of time, while also reflecting on the clarity of time's inherent order, endowing the temporal with a concrete form. Hanne Darboven was born in 1941 in Munich, Germany and died in 2009 in Hamburg, Germany. She participated in numerous exhibitions at major museums in Europe and North America, including "Hanne Darboven, Bücher 1966-2002″ at the Westfälisches Landesmuseum, Münster (2002); "Reconsidering the Object of Art: 1965-1975″ at the Museum of Contemporary Art, Los Angeles (1995-96); and "Live in Your Head: When Attitudes Become Form: Works-Concepts-Processes-Situations-Information" at the Kunsthalle Bern (1969). She also participated in Documentas 5 (1972), 6 (1977), 7 (1982), and 11 (2002), in Kassel; the 1973 São Paulo Bienal; and the 1982 Venice Biennale. Her work is included in a number of permanent collections including the Schaulager, Basel; Centre Georges Pompidou, Paris; the Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, New York; and the Museum of Modern Art, New York.

We are pleased to present a new large-scale installation by Miroslaw Balka. Employing non-traditional art materials, Balka has created a monumental work that draws on historical tragedy to reflect on the limits of the world, continuity, and catastrophe. Balka transformed the 21st Street gallery space, constructing a private room in which to encounter his work and creating an intimate atmosphere for viewers to contemplate the massive, elegiac sculpture before them. Meditating on trauma, the discourse of nature, and the resulting wounds of historical events, the work encourages viewers to confront the past and to bear witness to the events that have come to define our present. Over the course of the past thirty years, Balka has created a diverse body of work that engages notions of historical memory, the limits of representation, and the power and veracity of language. Encompassing installation, sculpture and video, Balka's oeuvre has a bare and minimalist quality, exhibiting a particular sensitivity to materials that generate multilayered associations for the viewer as witness. Balka utilizes symbolic abstraction rather than discrete monument to address places and events sometimes related to the legacy of Nazi occupation in Poland and to investigate notions of trauma and collective memory. For "The Order of Things," Balka contemplates both the possibility for and the limits of language and structural representation as a means for understanding history and its aftermath. Looking at the way conventions of truth and cultural discourse shift over time, Balka explores the limitations of our usual modes of classification and depiction, moving beyond them to introduce the viewer to new modes of thought. Miroslaw Balka was born in 1958 in Warsaw and was raised in Otwock, Poland, where he kept his studio until recently. Balka now lives and works in Warsaw. He has been the subject of many solo exhibitions at international venues, including Akademie der Künste, Berlin; Douglas Hyde Gallery, Dublin; Center for Contemporary Art, Warsaw; Museo Reina Sofía, Madrid; the Irish Museum of Modern Art, Dublin; K21, Dusseldorf, Germany; National Museum of Art, Osaka; Museet for Samtidskunst, Oslo; IVAM, Centre Del Carme, Valencia; Van Abbemuseum, Eindhoven; Museum Haus Lange, Krefeld; and The Renaissance Society at the University of Chicago. Balka has also been included in a number of important group exhibitions, including: "The Carnegie International 1995," Carnegie Museum of Art, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania; Documenta IX, Kassel, Germany; The 44th, 50th and 51th Venice Biennale, Venice, Italy; The 9th and 15th Sydney Biennale, Sydney, Australia; and the 2006 SITE Santa Fe, Santa Fe, New Mexico. Balka was awarded the 2009—2010 Unilever Tate Turbine Hall commission at Tate Modern, and in 2011 was included in the exhibition "Ostalgia" at the New Museum of Contemporary Art, New York.

Gladstone Gallery, in collaboration with the Fondazione Alighiero e Boetti in Rome, is pleased to present an exhibition of works by Alighiero Boetti. Throughout his career, Boetti exhibited a keen fascination with language and the alphabet, and "La Forza del Centro" highlights this interest by presenting an extensive collection of his Arazzi works, which meld aesthetic and linguistic elements to create a formal union between images and the written word. This exhibition is the first to display nearly every type of Boetti's Arazzi grandi, as well as a number of smaller Arazzi, and marks the first time that the majority of these works will be on view to the public. The brightly colored Arazzi works are embroidered pieces made in various sizes that depict sentences drawn from poetry, wisdoms from around the world, or sayings invented by Boetti himself. The Arazzi grandi, containing messages in both Italian and Farsi, are each distinct, recording the date when they were created, and containing an elaborate internal code that prescribes the order of the sentences on display. Like Boetti's approach to language throughout his oeuvre, which is at once analytical and playful, the messages alternate between deeply thoughtful statements and whimsical musings. The dates, carefully noted on each Arazzi grandi, mark a point of captivation for Boetti, as he was deeply interested in the concept of time and its inevitable passing. Of dating his works, Boetti said: "With every day that goes by, this date becomes more beautiful. It's time that works, it's all that works." Created primarily during the 1980s and 90s, these embroideries were made in Peshawar, Pakistan by Afghani craftswomen. Boetti first traveled to Afghanistan in the 1970s, where he became enamored with the colorful landscape and culture, local hospitality, and rituals and traditions of the country. On an early trip to Afghanistan he developed a relationship with Afghani embroiderers, who would go on to create works for him for the next two decades. Through these travels he also became interested in Persian writing and calligraphy as an expression of cultural and national identity. Boetti believed that an artist's role was not to invent, but rather to bring what already exists in the world into his work. He was particularly captivated by duality and dichotomy, ideas he explored in works like the Arazzi by juxtaposing notions of order and disorder, fullness and emptiness, east and west. Recognizing the inevitable fluctuation in all systems, he pushed the ideas conveyed in his work to their extreme polarities until disparate ideas expressed united with their opposites. Boetti was born in Turin, Italy in 1940, and in 1966 became affiliated with a group of artists who went on to form the Arte Povera movement. The movement sought to connect with real life through the use of everyday materials, and the artists shared an intense interest in the structures that support the "false" realities fostered by consumer-capitalism, and an equally invested interest in deconstructing them. Boetti was recently the subject of the major retrospective "Alighiero Boetti: Game Plan," which originated at the Reina Sofía in Madrid in 2011, and subsequently traveled to the Tate Modern, London (2012) and the Museum of Modern Art, New York (2012). Boetti has also been the subject of solo exhibitions at the Fowler Museum UCLA, Los Angeles (2012); MADRE, Naples (2009); Whitechapel Gallery, London (1999); Museum für Moderne Kunst, Franfurt (1998); Galleria Civica d'Arte Moderna, Turin (1996); Galleria Nazionale d'Arte Moderna, Rome (1996); Museum of Contemporary Art, Los Angeles (1994); Dia Center for Arts, New York (1994); P.S.1 Contemporary Art Center, New York (1994); Centre National d'Art Contemporain, Le Magasin, Grenoble (1993); Kunstverein, Bonn (1992); Stedelijk Van Abbemuseum, Eidhoven (1986); and Kunsthalle, Basel (1978). Boetti took part in Documenta 5 (1972) and Documenta 7 (1982), as well as the Venice Biennale (1978, 1980, 1986, 1990, 1995). In 2001, the Italian Pavilion at the Venice Biennale was dedicated entirely to Boetti's work.

We are pleased to present an exhibition of paintings and drawings by Victor Man. Evoking literary and cultural references, historical moments, and personal history, Man proposes new connections between seemingly unrelated images, objects, and events, to create works that break with the traditional linear nature of composition. Drawing on notions of myth, legend, and imagination, Man explores the impact of the passage of time on personal and historical narratives to create new aesthetic modes of encountering and understanding the present. Among the works included in the exhibition are a series of portraits inspired by James Joyce's protagonist Stephen Dedalus from A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man and Ulysses. Man became interested in developing work that grew out of literature – an art form with which he feels his own practice is closely aligned – in an effort to allow his work to be liberated from the present moment, and to have a larger framework for his work to exist within. In these works Man explores the androgyny of Dedalus, portraying him in scenes drawn both from Joyce's novel and also with references to earlier art historical and biblical figures. Adopting a Joycean style of narration for his own work, Man has created nonlinear compositions that draw simultaneously on the past and the present. Victor Man was born in 1974 and lives in Rome and Cluj, Romania. He has been the subject of a number of solo exhibitions at museums world wide including: Centre international d'art et du paysage, Ile de Vassiviere, France; Museum Boijmans van Beuningen, Rotterdam, Netherlands; Galleria d'Arte Moderna e Contemporanea di Bergamo, Bergamo, Italy; and Ikon Gallery, Birmingham, England. Man has also been included in a number of group exhibitions including: "Six Lines of Flight: Shifting Geographies in Contemporary Art" curated by Aspara DiQuinzio, San Francisco Museum of Modern Art, San Francisco; La Triennale, "Intense Proximity," Palais de Tokyo, Paris; "Tanzimat," Augarten Contemporary, Belvedere Museum, Vienna, Austria; "Whose (His)story," Kunstverein, Hamburg, Germany; "Back to Black," Kestner Gesellschaft, Hannover, Germany; "Art Focus 5," International Biennial of Contemporary Art, Jerusalem; and "Reframing," CCA, Andratx/Mallorca, Spain. His work was also exhibited in the Romanian Pavilion at the 52nd Venice Biennale in 2007, the 2nd Prague Biennial, and the 2008 Busan Biennial.

We are pleased to present an exhibition of new paintings by Carroll Dunham. Featuring nine works that draw on the motifs of nude bathers and pastoral landscapes familiar from Dunham's earlier paintings, the exhibition highlights the artist's continuing interest in these themes. Expanding upon the visual language that characterized his previous works, Dunham demonstrates a shift in his formal decision making, adhering less strictly to the subject's formal vocabulary and iconography, and instead allowing each work to evolve as a singular painting rather than as a work in a series. For the works included in this exhibition, Dunham replaces the rosy female figure present in his earlier series with a stark, white, nude. Depicting the classic art-historical motif of the bather made famous by artists from Cézanne to Bonnard, Dunham inverts the familiar scene of the demure woman, replacing her with a vibrant and animated figure caught in bold poses – arms extended, hair splayed across her face. Pushing color, form, and line to create collision-like interactions between compositional elements of the painting, Dunham creates a compact tension between the interlocking forms to explore the relationship between subject and landscape, foreground and background. First recognized for his wood veneer paintings in the 1980s, Dunham has gone on to explore the pictorial possibilities of painting and drawing, subverting the boundaries between representational imagery and abstraction. Populating his work variously with abstract appendages, bold lines, and human-like characters, Dunham has coaxed new forms out of familiar objects. The exhibition will be accompanied by a forthcoming catalogue titled Bathers Trees Carroll Dunham, which features paintings from 2009 through 2012 and an essay by Alison Gingeras. Carroll Dunham was born in 1949 and currently lives and works in New York and Connecticut. He has been the subject of numerous one-person exhibitions, including a mid-career retrospective at the New Museum in New York and an exhibition of paintings and sculptures at Millesgården in Stockholm. His work has been included in several Whitney Biennials and in "Disparaties and Deformations: Our Grotesque," SITE Santa Fe's fifth biennial curated by Robert Storr.

We are pleased to present an exhibition of new work by Huang Yong Ping. A founding member of the Xiamen Dada group in China during the mid-1980s – a movement that espoused the idea that "a new life calls for a new art, a new life has no need of art" – Huang Yong Ping strives to create a new mode of connecting art, politics, and cultural awareness, using art to instigate reform. Drawing on formal and conceptual practices from both Eastern and Western art historical traditions, Huang Yong Ping probes issues of national identity, politics, and social phenomenon to create works that call cultural stereotypes and philosophical narratives into question. For this exhibition Huang Yong Ping uses taxidermied animals, a material present in his earlier work, to create three installations that explore notions of time, chaos, and the relationship between religion and power. The main gallery space features "Circus," a monumental installation composed of a massive wooden hand hovering over a bamboo enclosure, orchestrating a puppet show before fifteen headless animals. The animals gaze upwards at a robed monkey skeleton, inspired by the character Sun WuKong from the classic Chinese novel "Journey to the West," who holds in his hand a smaller puppet. The confrontation between an absent mechanical god and his captive audience begs the question of who or what is in control, and invites the viewer to reassess his understanding of relationships – both to others and to the world he inhabits. With his presentation of "Circus" and the two other works on view, Huang Yong Ping meditates on an apocalyptic vision of the world's end. Lingering in the abstract space where it is possible for time to end and man to cease to exist, the artist creates a theatrical vision of our own destruction, asking what it means to bear witness to the tragedy of humanity's evolution and ruin. Born in 1954, Huang Yong Ping participated in the seminal exhibition "Magiciens de la Terre" at Centre Georges Pompidou, Paris in 1989, and represented France at the 1999 Venice Biennale. In 2006, the Walker Art Center in Minneapolis organized and premiered his retrospective "House of Oracles," which traveled to Mass MoCA in North Adams, Massachusetts, Vancouver Art Gallery, and Ullens Center, Beijing. Other solo exhibitions include: CCA Kitakyushu, Japan; De Appel, Amsterdam; Fondation Cartier pour l'Art Contemporain, Paris; Atelier d'Artistes de la Ville de Marseille; Astrup Fearnley Museum, Oslo; Barbican Art Gallery, London; and New Museum of Contemporary Art, New York.

We are pleased to present an exhibition of works on paper by Keith Haring, made between 1978 and 1982. The show includes small and large-scale ink drawings from Haring's early career, works that feature some of his most iconic imagery. Detailing the years between Haring's arrival in New York as a student at the School of Visual Arts and the development of his studio practice, this exhibition traces the evolution of Haring's visual language and style, inspired by both the architecture and cultural environment of New York City. A prolific artist known for his animated figures and pop-graffiti aesthetic, Haring was an integral part of the avant-garde downtown culture of New York in the 1980s. Using easily accessible imagery, Haring explored complex themes founded on culturally subversive attitudes toward sexuality, gender, religion, and politics to engage viewers in a dialogue about issues often not broadly discussed. Drawing on the graphic style of such artists as Pierre Alechinsky and Jean Dubuffet, Haring developed a dynamic mark-making technique that characterized much of his practice. During this early period, Haring became interested in exploring geometric forms and patterns, most notably the simplicity of the line, which became a foundational aspect of his work. The works included in this exhibition were all featured in "Keith Haring 1978 – 1982," an exhibition co-organized by the Contemporary Arts Center, Cincinnati and the Kunsthalle Wien, Vienna. The exhibition originated at the Kunsthalle Wien in 2010, and traveled to the Contemporary Arts Center in 2011 and The Brooklyn Museum, New York in 2012. Keith Haring was born on May 4, 1958 in Reading, Pennsylvania and died at the age of thirty-one of AIDS-related illnesses in New York City. Since his death, his work has been the subject of several national and international museum retrospectives. Beginning this April, Haring's work will be featured in a major retrospective at the Musee d'Art Moderne de la Ville de Paris, curated by Dieter Buchhart. In addition, his work is in major private and public collections, including, The Museum of Modern Art, New York; The Whitney Museum of American Art, New York; Los Angeles County Museum of Art; The Art Institute of Chicago; The Bass Museum, Miami; Centre Georges Pompidou, Paris; Ludwig Museum, Cologne; and Stedelijk Museum, Amsterdam.

We are pleased to present an exhibition of new work by Andro Wekua. Working in a diverse array of media, Wekua has developed a visual language grounded in the exploration of human experience through the subtle intersections of individual and collective memory, personal identity, and history. Looking to genres such as fantasy, science fiction, and horror, Wekua creates fantastical and often macabre tableaux, revealing the complex processes of reconstruction and fragmentation that continually inform the personal, social, and fictive experience of remembrance. "Dreaming Dreaming" presents a series of new painting, sculpture, and collage, as well as Wekua's most recent film, Never Sleep with a Strawberry in Your Mouth II. The paintings included in the exhibition mark a notable break from Wekua's earlier work, revealing a more uniformly abstract approach to imagery. A number of these recent compositions comprise a nearly monochromatic palette, containing only glimpses of the figurative elements and collage techniques characteristic of his earlier work. Using fully saturated colors to achieve moody, immersive environments and richly layered landscapes, Wekua moves between the sincerity of self-reflection and the synthetic imagery of pop culture. The sculptures on view include models of buildings Wekua remembers from his childhood in Sukhumi, a seaside town in Georgia that was devastated by civil war in the early 1990s. Conjuring images from memory and supplementing them with online research, Wekua creates sculptural representations of buildings, which contain blank spaces that correspond to what he refers to as "memory gaps." Creating pictorial representations of the past to better comprehend and grapple with the present, Wekua meditates on the tenuous boundary between historical reality and the artificial construct of remembering, pointing to the inescapable fact that the past is always distorted by the subjectivity of memory. A catalogue titled "Dreaming Dreaming" is being published in conjunction with the exhibition. The book features the text "Sebastapolis (Interview with A.)" by Mark von Schlegell, as well as images of works in the exhibition. Andro Wekua was born in 1977 in Georgia, and studied visual arts there and in Basel, Switzerland. His work has been the subject of solo exhibitions at several museums including Kunsthalle Wien, Austria; Kunsthalle Fridericianum, Kassel, Germany; Castello di Rivoli, Torino, Italy; Wiels, Brussels, Belgium, Neue Kunst Halle, St. Gallen, Switzerland; Kunstmuseum Winterthur, Switzerland; Museum Boijmans van Beuningen, Rotterdam, Netherlands; Camden Arts Center, London; the De Haalen Haarlem, Netherlands; and Le Magasin, Grenoble, France. He has participated in various group shows including "ILLUMInations" at the 54th Venice Biennale (2011), "Contemplating the Void" at the Guggenheim Museum in New York (2010), "10,000 Lives," 8th Gwangju Biennale, Gwangju, South Korea (2010), "Life on Mars: 55th Carnegie International", Carnegie Museum of Art, Pittsburgh, and the 4th Berlin Biennial (2006).

We are pleased to present the exhibition "Concordia, Concordia" by Thomas Hirschhorn. The exhibition features a large-scale work inspired by the sinking of the cruise ship Costa Concordia, which ran aground off the coast of Italy in January 2012. Artist's Statement: As many people, I saw the pictures showing the inside of the sunken cruise ship Costa Concordia after the wreck. The floor emerging upright had become a wall, the wall was turned into a ceiling and the ceiling into the opposite wall. Every non-attached thing was floating in water, like a barricade in movement. A barricade made of all that points out the impassable and cumbersome inutility. I was struck by this apocalyptic upside down vision of the banal and cheap "nice, fake, and cozy" interior of the overturned ship. This pictures the uncertainty and precariousness of the past, of the present moment, and of the future. I saw it as an amusing and disturbing but nevertheless logical and convincing form. This must be the form of our contemporary disaster. This must be the ultimate expression of the precarious, which nobody wants to confront. "Get back on board, captain!" shouted the coast guard officer to the already safely landed captain of the Costa Concordia who refused to go back to his vessel. "Get back on board!" means there is definitely no escape – we have to confront the self-produced disaster in its incredible normality – there is no way out, there is no place to flee, there is no safe land anymore! This is the starting point that made me think of and start out to conceive the work "Concordia, Concordia." I want to do something Big. To do something Big does not mean to do something monumental or gigantic. If something is Big, it's because it needs to be Big. One must understand that necessity as such or within its own logic. That's why, when making things Big, I do it myself, with my own hands, with my own materials, with my own visual vocabulary and with my own work. I do it in order to avoid the "Blow-Up" effect and I do it to avoid falling into the trap of "Pumping the Size." I want to do a Big work to show that the saying "Too Big to Fail" no longer makes any sense. On the contrary, when something is Too Big, it must Fail – this is what I want to give Form to. I want to understand this as a logic and this is the Form! This is what I want to explore, it is the grounding of my new work "Concordia, Concordia." "Concordia, Concordia" brings back to mind the disastrous wreck of the cruise ship Costa Concordia and the images of the immersed ship in its confusing architecture. The flooded casino of consumption stands for evidence: the evidence of a coming disaster and the evidence of an announced failure. This is "Concordia, Concordia." – Thomas Hirschhorn Hirschhorn's work is being presented concurrently by the Dia Art Foundation in "Timeline: Work in Public Space," from September 15 – November 3, 2012 at 541 West 22nd Street, the site of the future Dia:Chelsea project space. The exhibition features a new large-scale collage of images, written statements, and text excerpts chronicling the artist's interventions at urban and rural sites and is being presented in anticipation of Hirschhorn's Gramsci Monument, the fourth and final project of Hirschhorn's Monument series, that Dia will present in summer 2013 in the Bronx or at another location in New York City. A Conversation with Thomas Hirschhorn and Hal Foster, Townsend Martin '17 Professor of Art and Archaeology at Princeton University, will relaunch the Dia Discussions in Contemporary Culture series, on Saturday, September 15, at 6:30 pm. Thomas Hirschhorn was born in 1957 in Bern, Switzerland, and now lives and works in Paris. His work has been the subject of numerous solo exhibitions including at the Institute of Contemporary Art, Boston; Centre Georges Pompidou, Paris; Museu d'Art Contemporani, Barcelona; Kunsthaus Zürich; Art Institute of Chicago; Museum Ludwig, Cologne; and Secession, Vienna. In 2003 he created the Musée Précaire Albinet, a temporary "Presence and Production" project in Aubervilliers, France. Additionally, he has taken part in many international group exhibitions, including the 2012 La Triennale at the Palais de Tokyo in Paris; the Swiss Pavilion of the 2011 Venice Biennale with his work Crystal of Resistance, Documenta 11 in Kassel, Germany, where his large-scale public work, Bataille Monument, was on view; "Heart of Darkness" at the Walker Art Center; and "Life on Mars: the 55th Carnegie International." Hirschhorn was the recipient of the Prix Marcel Duchamp in 2000, the Joseph Beuys-Preis in 2004 and the Kurt Schwitters Prize in 2011.

We are pleased to present an exhibition of photographs by Roe Ethridge installed at the gallery's Brussels location. Effortlessly employing an array of classic photographic genres – from portraiture to still life to landscape – Ethridge captures his subjects and surrounding environment in vivid, intimate detail. Ethridge combines the glossy, prefabricated affect of commercial photography with the thought-provoking perspective of fine art photography to create works at once familiar and uncanny, nostalgic and distinctly contemporary. For the exhibition "Interiors," Ethridge draws on the tradition of domestic portraiture, depicting scenes of kitchens, dining rooms, and bedrooms to create tableaux that invert conventional ideas of domesticity and transform mundane scenes into captivating and often unsettling portraits. "Interiors" investigates the broad world of personal space, featuring images of Ethridge's home and studio, magazine photographs of staged bedrooms inspired by the suburban aesthetic, and billboard advertisements. Drawing on diverse manifestations of interior design and the representation of space, Ethridge creates unexpected portraits that challenge the viewer's perspective and turn familiar objects into nearly abstract images. Born in 1969 in Miami, Florida, Roe Ethridge studied photography in Atlanta, Georgia before leaving the southern states to work in New York. His photographs have appeared in solo exhibitions at the Institute of Contemporary Art, Boston; Garage, Moscow; and Le Consortium, Dijon, France. His work has also been included in numerous group exhibitions, including at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York; Aspen Art Museum, Aspen, Colorado; 2008 Whitney Biennial, New York; The Barbican Center, London; and at the Museum of Modern Art/P.S. 1, New York.

We are pleased to present an exhibition of works by Belgian artist Jan Vercruysse, curated by Anne Pontégnie. The exhibition encompasses a selection of Vercruysse's work created between 1990 and 2011 and is the artist's first show in New York since 2009. Vercruysse began his career as a poet, and though in 1974 he shifted his practice to focus on the visual arts, poetry and the presence of language remain a central influence on his work. Curatorial Statement: I conceived of this exhibition as an homage to Vercruysse's distinguished oeuvre. Featuring a selection of sculptures from each of Vercruysse's distinct bodies of work from the last two decades, the exhibition comprises a unique glimpse into the artist's continually unfolding logic and his meditations on recurring themes. The show features sculptures from the TOMBEAUX, M(M), Les Paroles, and PLACES series, which explore memory, monuments, and loss. Starting in 1987 and until 1994, Jan Vercruysse developed a series named TOMBEAUX. TOMBEAUX (T. 184) (1990), is made of cobalt blue glass sheets and adapts itself to the architecture in which it is installed. TOMBEAUX [Extrait] (1991), is a trombone made of blue cobalt glass. In both cases, the artist infuses the use of the object–shelves and trombone–with a different power of invocation, what Vercruysse calls "memory as an active energy." From 1992 to 1998, Vercruysse worked on the M(M) series, using three different prototypes of the piano form to produce wooden forms of each. From these Vercruysse created a mold, followed by hollow, plaster, "positive" forms. All are legless pianos resting on beams. The M stands for Memory, Monument, and Momentum. Here, M (M 3) (1992), M (M 7) (1992), and M (M 8) (1993) echo the musical elements found in TOMBEAUX [Extrait] and in Les Parole [Letto]. Developed between 1998 and 2001, Les Paroles [Letto] takes the shape of a lectern. Standing half open, the painted wooden structures both conceal and reveal, combining flatness and volume. Inside the structures, Vercruysse sometimes places musical partitions and at other times marbles, as in Les Parole [Letto] III (1999), presented here. Marbles introduce the "game" element and thus relate to the next series: PLACES. In 2005, Vercruysse started a new work, also developed through a series, called PLACES. Where the TOMBEAUX works were "empty," PLACES concentrate "meanings," "things that happened," "parts of lives." A first group of works, PLACES I, comprises the hands of the five cards of the Poker card game. A second group of works, PLACES II, is based on the image of commemorative plaques, often embedded in the floors of churches or found in archeological sites. In this case, the artist replaces the traditional inscriptions with the four suits of playing cards. A third group of works, PLACES III, introduces text. The characters in the Roman alphabet, which would typically appear on commemorative plaques, are here replaced by the symbols commonly found in a deck of playing cards. Vercruysse composed the works in his latest series, PLACES [Lost], from a limited number of objects: wine crates, billiards cues, and pallets. The objects are combined, cast in bronze, and often painted. Together, these objects become their own site. Since the 1980s, Jan Vercruysse has worked to redefine the language of contemporary sculpture. His works, at once poetic and playful, philosophical and meditative, display an uncommon precision, which helps them resist interpretation to open new modes of thoughts and enjoyment.

We are pleased to present the exhibition Requiem for the Sun: The Art of Mono-ha, organized in collaboration with Blum & Poe, Los Angeles. This exhibition examines the postwar Japanese artistic phenomenon Mono-ha (School of Things). Representing a key art historical turning point, "Requiem for the Sun" refers to the death of the sun as emblematic of the loss of symbolic expression and permanence immanent to the object in Japanese postwar art practice. Included in the exhibition are works by Koji Enokura (1942–1995), Susumu Koshimizu (1944– ), Nobuo Sekine (1942– ), Kishio Suga (1944– ), Jiro Takamatsu (1936–1998), Noboru Takayama (1944– ), Lee Ufan (1936– ), and Katsuro Yoshida (1943–1999). Mono-ha's primary tenet explores the encounter between natural and industrial objects, such as glass, stones, steel plates, wood, cotton, light bulbs, leather, oil, wire, and Japanese paper, in and of themselves arranged directly on the floor or in an outdoor field. Evident in these works is a tendency based not on the art historical recuperation of objects, but rather on maintaining an affective relationship between works and our surrounding environment. That is, the works operate as a process of perceiving a perpetually passing present that opens the materiality of the work beyond what is simply seen. These practices are linked to the cultural milieu of process and post-minimalist art apparent on an international level during the 1960s and 1970s. What distinguishes these works is the refined technique of repetition as a studied production of difference developed over time in each artist's practice. The exhibition shows key installations, works on paper, and photographs that reveal resonant concepts and artistic methods relative to the exhibition. Some themes include perceiving works as actions or events, experiments in topology and spatial continuity, visceral materiality, and the contingency of the body. While the art of Mono-ha has been the subject of exhibitions in Asia and Europe, it is virtually unknown in North America. Requiem for the Sun: The Art of Mono-ha provides a critical introduction to this extremely significant movement. A 244-page catalog has been published in conjunction with Requiem for the Sun: The Art of Mono-ha, which includes an essay with new scholarship by Mika Yoshitake, translations of artists' texts, a chronology of historical exhibitions with accompanying rare installation photographs, and new photography of the works.

We are pleased to announce an exhibition of new work by Wangechi Mutu, marking the artist's first show at our Brussels location. Meditating on the interplay between poetic symbolism and dreamlike revelation, Mutu creates works that inventively critique the hegemony of Western society and the institutions of power that regulate the aesthetic and symbolic representations of gender and race. First recognized for her collages that amalgamate materials as diverse as fashion magazines, periodicals, pornography, and documentary photography, Mutu has continued to employ similar materials in her recent work, repurposing familiar objects to create unexpected and imaginative experiences that reflect on sexuality, femininity, politics, and the chaos of the everyday world. The exhibition will feature fifteen works from Mutu's blackthrones series, a group of haunting assemblages sculpted into towering thrones. Inspired by the form of an ordinary wooden country chair, originating from colonial English designs and often seen in Western schoolrooms and kitchens, Mutu builds upon this familiar structure by integrating unusual materials to transform the appearance of this everyday object. The blackthrones recombine many of the fundamental elements that inform Mutu's creative practice, using strategies of collage and juxtaposition to construct materially conscious objects. The works incorporate black garbage bags, electrical tape, tinfoil, tufts of tinsel, and feather boas, taking on a delicately haphazard look as each extends upward on spindly legs, transforming these once humble chairs into imposing and unsettling objects. Much like the fantastical figures that populate her two-dimensional works, Mutu's thrones appear caught between states of being: the aesthetic both crude and refined, the essence both chair and creature, their identities both shamanistic and sculptural. Mutu was born in 1972 in Nairobi, Kenya, and received her MFA from Yale University. Her work has been the subject of solo shows at museums and institutions throughout the United States and abroad including: Le Musée d'art contemporain de Montréal, Montreal; WIELS, Brussels; Deutsche Guggenheim, Berlin; Museum of Contemporary Art, San Diego; Art Gallery of Ontario, Toronto; San Francisco Museum of Modern Art, San Francisco; and the Miami Art Museum, Miami. Her work has also appeared in numerous group shows at institutions including: Palais de Tokyo, Paris; Gotesborgs Kunsthalle, Sweden; Museum of Modern Art, New York; Tate Liverpool, UK; Minneapolis Institute of Art, Minneapolis; and The Studio Museum in Harlem, New York. In 2010 Mutu received the Deutsche Guggenheim Artist of the Year, Berlin.

We are pleased to present an exhibition of new work by Anish Kapoor, the artist's first show in New York in four years. Spanning both gallery spaces, this two-part exhibition demonstrates Kapoor's ongoing exploration of the formal and conceptual framework that has informed his artistic practice for over three decades. In these new sculptural works, Kapoor brings together two major facets of his approach to the three-dimensional form, reflecting both the highly engineered and more organic processes within his oeuvre. At once austere and intimate, messy and refined, Kapoor's work dually confronts and expands the basic nature of materiality and form. For the gallery's 21st Street space, Kapoor has created a site-specific, monumental Cor-Ten steel sculpture that assumes a looming, circular form. Rising above and extending around the viewer, the work transforms the environment, creating an acute awareness of spatial composition and the phenomenological experience of surface, scale, and shape. This new sculpture evinces Kapoor's belief that to generate new art one must create new space, a theme he continually expands upon by playing with our perception of interior and exterior, reflection and depth. Like his stainless steel sculptures, which use reflective surfaces to destabilize the distinctions between object and surroundings, Kapoor's works in Cor-Ten steel enfold the viewer into immersive and heightened encounters that capture the intersecting forces of the mind, eye, and body. Our 24th Street location features a multi-part installation comprised of twenty-two freestanding concrete sculptures. Formed by densely textured layers of poured concrete and mounted on metal palettes, these heaping sculptures evoke the sensorial nature of materiality and mass. Intentionally employing materials that could not hold their initial shape, Kapoor let the pieces unravel to create new organic forms that hover between contemporary object and ancient entity. These works linger in a state between coalescence and collapse, a relationship that speaks to Kapoor's ongoing interest in the idea of "objectness" and the incomplete nature of the sculptural form. Anish Kapoor was born in 1954 in Bombay, India, and has lived and worked in London since 1973. Kapoor was recently commissioned, with engineer Cecil Balmond, to design Britain's largest public artwork, a tower measuring nearly 400 feet that will be unveiled for the London 2012 Olympics. Inspired by the Tower of Babel, the work, Orbit features a lattice of snaking steel beams that protrude from the structure at gravity-defying angles. In 2011, Kapoor became the fourth artist to receive the MONUMENTA commission to create a site-specific installation at the Grand Palais in Paris. Additional past solo exhibitions include shows at the National Gallery of Modern Art, New Delhi; Museo Guggenheim de Arte Moderno y Contemporáno, Bilbao; Baltic Center for Contemporary Art, Gateshead; CAPC Musée d'art contemporain de Bordeaux; Centro Galego de Arte Contemporanea, Santiago de Compostela; Hayward Gallery, London; Schirn Kunsthalle, Frankfurt; Fondazione Prada, Milan; DePont Foundation, Tilburg; Kunsthaus Bregenz, Bregenz; Museo Archeologico Nazionale, Naples; Haus der Kunst, Munich; and the Institute of Contemporary Art, Boston. Kapoor received the Premio Duemila for his British Pavilion at the Venice Biennale in 1990 and received the Turner Prize in 1991.

We are pleased to announce a group exhibition featuring works in ceramic by nine contemporary artists including Jessica Jackson Hutchins, Cameron Jamie, Liz Larner, Andrew Lord, William O'Brien, Sterling Ruby, Rosemarie Trockel, Paloma Varga Weisz, and Andro Wekua. While these artists' practices encompass a diverse range of media from drawing and installation to film and video, each incorporates clay in distinct ways that reveal not only the multitude of formal and conceptual possibilities of the medium, but also the broader, constructive processes through which forms emerge. The exhibition borrows its title from Aristotle's theory of the alchemical transmutation of basic matter into form. The concept alludes to the elemental primacy of clay and the ways in which the production of ceramic is immanently bound to the technical processes that transform its material properties. Marked by its inherent malleability and morphological nature, clay's essential "informe" invites artists to draw upon the historical context of its varying forms and functions to create visceral experiences that challenge our notions of art and objecthood. Exploring the relationship between materiality and function, Hutchins combines found objects including furniture, fabric, and newspaper to create works that simultaneously explore the mundane and mythological aspects of everyday life. Glazed in shades of green, Jamie's ceramic sculptures embody the emotional gestures of physical energies, using both the controllable and uncontrollable dimensions of ceramic to allow each form to find its own identity. While Larner's wall mounted work focuses on the perceptual experience in the act of looking, Lord draws upon the variegated vocabulary of Pre-Colombian art, creating an assembly of vessels that feature motifs such as the double-headed snake and skull. O'Brien's uncanny ceramic objects are distinctly anti-minimalist and represent his intuitive approach to materiality, much like Ruby's basin-like dish filled with crudely modeled clay fragments, reminiscent of prehistoric artifacts and archeological sites. Displaced from their original contexts, Trockel's ceramic sculptures deconstruct the human impulse to neatly connect meaning and function, instead creating works that often mysteriously play upon a network of social and cultural associations. Weisz's work looks to the human figure, modeling tender portraits glazed in muted tones that imbue the act of looking with a sense of poignant remembrance. Uniformly glazed in a porcelain white, Wekua's sculpture reflects his interest in re-contextualizing architectural elements and the human figure, generating uniquely dream-like works that meditate upon the conditions of memory, fantasy, and identity. Immediately reflecting each artist's intimate relationship to style, scale, texture, shape, and color, together these works illuminate not only the wide range of formal and technical concerns at play, but also the ever growing artistic imperative to subvert, resist, and reinvent historical precedents.

We are pleased to present a group exhibition curated by Ugo Rondinone. Featuring 19 artists, the show presents works in a variety of mediums, including painting, drawing, sculpture, photography, and performance art. "the spirit level" contains works by: Martin Boyce Al Hansen Joe Bradley Kim Jones Peter Buggenhout Hans Josephsohn Ann Craven Klara Liden Jay DeFeo Andrew Lord Latifa Echakhch Sarah Lucas Saul Fletcher Hans Schärer Sam Gilliam Rudolf Schwarzkogler Amy Granat Alan Shields A limited edition hand-made catalogue as well as a full-color printed catalogue will be available in conjunction with the exhibition.

We are pleased to announce our fourth solo exhibition of new paintings by Magnus Plessen. For over a decade, Plessen has been known for his subtle investigations into the phenomenological structure of vision, tactility, and form that are the foundation of his painting practice. Looking to the immediate material properties of paint and the two-dimensional surface, Plessen constructs his compositions by systematically adding and subtracting sections of paint to create a shifting field of positive and negative space, revealing not only the artist's process of mark making, but also the ghostly presence of what has been removed. Plessen's imagery is determinedly generalized, often showing just a suggestion of a face, bottle, or hand. These motifs emerge from a fractal landscape of lines, shapes, and colors to provide a palpable tension between abstraction and representation. This exhibition brings together two new series of large-scale paintings that together continue to expand upon Plessen's formal strategies. Returning to the female form, the first set of works present the image of a pregnant woman. In these paintings, the figures are positioned frontally, facing the viewer in a collage-like assemblage of fragmented body parts, creating a feeling of spatial flatness while celebrating the subject's physical presence. In the second body of work, Plessen adopts the notion of rotation as an analogy for building movement and momentum within the structure of each painting. Plessen employs this as an organizational principle, invoking a visual sense of rotation by positioning the figure of a head at the center of each canvas to create a generative force of action around which the painting's elements are arranged. Unlike the directness of the female figure, these works eschew specific subject matter and instead build upon an internal logic of rhythm, motion, and temporality. Plessen explains: These paintings take less notice of the presence of the viewer than earlier works. Imagine a theater performance being in full blast as you enter the space of the theater to take your seat. This indifference to me or possibly the onlooker, and a feeling of unfamiliarity of the depicted heads and body parts, give the rotation paintings a quality of coming from a long distance to my mind. While Plessen's color values have previously remained distinctly muted, both new series playfully engage a palette of bright pinks, blues, and yellows, which further punctuate the artist's depth of space as well as a newly explored painterly light. Through these works, Plessen establishes a vibrant exchange between his rigorous formal structures, developed sense of materiality, and the ever-unfolding experience of viewing a painting.

We are pleased to announce an exhibition of work by R. H. Quaytman. This exhibition will present a series of new works comprised of silk-screened paintings on wood panels that continue to follow the discursive logic of Quaytman's broader creative practice. Referring to each exhibition as a "Chapter," Quaytman's terminology suggests an unfolding, inter-relational structure within the installations that determines both the overarching organizational principle as well as the mode in which the individual works are executed. In "Point de Gaze, Chapter 23," Quaytman further articulates the perceptual and durational experience of painting as an ever-shifting investigation of the inter-personal, historical, and architectural contexts of the exhibition's site and space. Initiated by a period of research during which Quaytman looks to various textual sources to invoke or conjure her subject matter, each new chapter combines a set of three optical imperatives – looking into, looking at, and obscured or disrupted vision. Each approach uses specific technical strategies to ground the imagery in the formal act of looking. This new series compellingly takes up these modes and methods. The artist generated work in this exhibition though exploring three subjects that progressively informed one another. The first revolved around a very small, geometric sculpture by Lygia Clark called Estruturas de Caixa de Fósforos (Matchbox Structures), from 1964, in Barbara Gladstone's private collection. Situating this diminutive work in an open box bisected by a mirror, Quaytman playfully disrupts the autonomy of the sculptural object by visually and materially reframing its perceptual possibilities. From this study, Quaytman produced several black and white Polaroid pictures, which were used for the silk-screened images in many of the paintings on view. The second and third subjects emerged while installing I Modi, Chapter 22 in Venice, through a conversation with an art historian, who introduced a little known exhibition catalogue from 1994 entitled, "Le jardin clos de l'ame" organized by Paul Vandenbroeck in Brussels. Typical of Quaytman's approach, reading this book led to further investigations into the cultural history of the Beguines, a Roman-Catholic laic order of women active in the Netherlands in the 13th and 14th Centuries. This semi-monastic community operated outside the social norms of traditional convent life and often took an unconventional approach to religious spirituality, producing the first mystical writings of the period. The motifs in several of the related paintings were inspired by a group of Beguines' reliquaries of ornate head-pieces, which Quaytman very loosely replicated and shrouded over three people. While Quaytman's simple construction masks the identity of each individual, the artist alludes to the importance of the exhibition's location by incorporating a Brussels resident. The third subject Quaytman turned to was the history of lace-making in Belgium, which was produced by the Beguines as a source of income. The title of the exhibition takes its name from a form of delicate needlepoint lace that first originated in Brussels and was referred to as "Point de Gaze." Together Quaytman's paintings interlace these rich histories, generating a network of associations that move deftly between the perceptual conditions of viewership and the referential power of the images. R. H. Quaytman was born in Boston in 1961. The artist has been the subject of solo exhibitions at museums and institutions including: Kunsthalle Basel, Switzerland; Neuberger Museum of Art, Purchase, NY; San Francisco Museum of Modern Art, CA; and The Institute of Contemporary Art, Boston. Quaytman's work has been included in group exhibitions at: CCS Bard Hessel Museum of Art, Annandale-on-Hudson, NY; Sculpture Center, NY; Bergen Kunsthall, Norway; and MoMA PS1, NY. Quaytman was included in the 54th Venice Biennale in 2011 and the Whitney Biennial in 2010. The artist currently lives and works in New York.

We are pleased to announce our fifth exhibition with Shirin Neshat. In her upcoming project, Neshat will present a new series of photographs and a video installation, both of which explore the underlying conditions of power within socio-cultural structures. Inspired by the sweeping momentum of recent political uprisings in the Arab world, Neshat turned to both historical and contemporary sources to generate richly provocative metaphors for the network of relations that comprise a society. The new photographic series, titled The Book of Kings, is named after the ancient book Shahnameh (The Book of Kings), a long poem of epic tragedies written by the Persian poet Ferdowsi between c. 977 and 1010 AD. Shahnameh retells the mythical and historical past of Greater Iran from the creation of the world until the Islamic conquest of Persia in the 7th Century. Divided into three groups—the Masses, the Patriots, and the Villains—Neshat's portraits of Iranian and Arab youth comprise black and white photographs with meticulously executed calligraphic texts and drawings inscribed over each subject's face and body. These texts and illustrations—drawn from Shahnameh as well as from contemporary poetry by Iranian writers and prisoners—both obscure and illuminate the subjects' facial expressions and emotive intensity, intimately linking the current energy of contemporary Iran with its mythical and historical past. In this arresting body of work, Neshat returns to the confrontational nature of her iconic Women of Allah series, while re-focusing on themes of revolution and the bold-faced defiance of youth. In her new three-channel video installation, Neshat draws upon themes of justice and the struggle of the artist against the constraints of authoritarian rule. Creating a space where moral judgment is questioned and the viewer's allegiances oscillate between identifying with the victim and being accomplice to power, Neshat investigates the repressed and unspoken elements of social and cultural consensus through this bold new work. Shirin Neshat was born in Qazvin, Iran and moved to the United States in 1974. She has had solo exhibitions at the Museo de Arte Moderno, Mexico City; Contemporary Arts Museum, Houston; Walker Art Center, Minneapolis; Castello di Rivoli, Turin; Wexner Center for the Arts, Columbus; the Art Institute of Chicago; the Serpentine Gallery, London; Museo de Arte Contemporaneo, León, Spain, and the the Hamburger Bahnhof, Berlin. Neshat was included in Prospect.1, the 2008 New Orleans Biennial, Documenta XI, the 2000 Whitney Biennial, and the 1999 Venice Biennale. Neshat was awarded the Silver Lion at the 66th International Venice Film Festival (2009), the Lillian Gish Prize (2006), the Hiroshima Freedom Prize (2005), and the First International Award at the 48th Venice Biennale (1999). OverRuled, Neshat's commission for the fourth edition of Performa, premiered in November 2011. A major retrospective of Neshat's work, organized by the Detroit Institute of Arts, will open in April 2013. Neshat currently lives and works in New York City.

We are pleased to announce an exhibition of new work by Swiss artist Ugo Rondinone. Born in 1964, Rondinone has been working since the mid 1980s to create immersive and affectively charged meditations on the experiential qualities of the everyday. Drawing upon the subject of the dream and dream-states as well as the metaphysical nature of being in the world, Rondinone subtly crosses the borders between the personal and the universal while working in a broad range of media, including sculpture, photography, video, and drawing. Using stark installations stripped of narrative action, Rondinone deftly crafts scenarios in which the viewer is confronted with the primacy of one's own existence and the fleeting charge of the present moment. This exhibition will present new sculptures from the nude series, which began in 2010. Consisting of a group of three cast-wax, human-scale figures, these works further explore Rondinone's interest in the conditions of consciousness and the transience of existence. In contrast to the nude exhibition at Gladstone Gallery's white cube space in New York, this installation in the domestic environment of the Brussels location shifts the relationship between the sculptures and their surroundings to a more intimate scale. Since the early 1990s, Rondinone has looked to figuration as a means of mining issues of identity and representation both formally and conceptually. His interest in the human subject reveals his inexhaustible questioning of the psychic and emotive depth of self-construction and the underlying conditions of human existence. The figures presented here appear expressionless and remote, seemingly detached from their immediate surroundings in the bare starkness of their forms and their varying poses of hermetic contemplation. Through the primary and exposed state of representation as well as the material composition of his subjects, Rondinone creates a timeless scenario in which sensorial and existential encounters collide. Rondinone was born in 1964 in Brunnen, Switzerland. His work has most recently been the subject of solo exhibitions at Kunsthaus Aargauer, Switzerland and Museo de Arte Contemporéneo de Castilla y León, Spain. His work was also recently included in the 2011 Yokohama Triennale, titled after one of his works, "Our Magic Hour." In 2007 he represented Switzerland in the 52nd Venice Biennial as well as curated "The Third Mind" at Palais de Tokyo in Paris. He currently lives and works in New York.

We are pleased to announce an exhibition of new work by Jim Hodges, which will be mounted across both gallery spaces in Chelsea and marks the artist's first project at the gallery's New York locations. For over two decades, Hodges has employed a broad range of everyday and precious materials to create works that transform the quotidian object into a site where the personal, political, and universal merge through simple gesture and poetic command. Taking up varied modes of process and production, Hodges' practice resists the definitional aims of discourse, instead offering multilayered works that evoke resonant themes such as identity, loss, mortality, and love. In this two-part exhibition, Hodges presents several new large-scale sculptural works that investigate notions of time, movement, color, and reflection. Furthering his frequent use of manipulated mirrored elements, Hodges will exhibit his largest black-mirrored sculpture to date, creating a contemplative yet fractured zone for reflection and refraction. A room-sized installation, inspired by the artist's recent trip to India, demonstrates a heightened focus on color, saturation, and performance. Merging the real with the imagined, a monumental grouping of sculptures seamlessly juxtaposes dense organic forms with interventions of synthetic beauty. Moving between disparate media and contrasting forms, Hodges embeds each with a charged sense of its own making and a multitude of metaphoric possibilities. While these new sculptures mark a significant departure from the ephemeral quality and intimate scale of Hodges's previous work, they emphasize the artist's ongoing interest in a spectrum of materiality and the liminal space between beauty and loss. Underscoring Hodges' commitment to linking material with lived experience, several of the works on view will evolve temporally and materially over the course of the exhibition. Various performances will take place, during which other forms of artistic expression– including dance and textual reading– will respond to and interact with the sculptural works on view. Drawing upon the collaborative nature and communal foundation of these works, Hodges creates a dynamic environment where color becomes form and movement generates action. Jim Hodges was born in 1957 in Spokane, Washington and received his MFA from Pratt Institute in Brooklyn, NY. His work has been the subject of numerous solo exhibitions, including: the Centre Pompidou, Paris; Camden Art Centre, London; the Aspen Art Museum; CGAC, Santiago de Compostela, Spain; Tang Teaching Museum and Art Gallery at Skidmore College, Saratoga Springs, NY; and the Museum of Contemporary Art, Chicago. Hodges was recently appointed to serve as the Acting Director of the Graduate Sculpture Department at the Yale University School of Art for the 2011/2012 academic year. His film Untitled, 2010, will be distributed by Visual AIDS on December 1, 2011 in conjunction with World AIDS Day/Day With(out) Art. A major retrospective of Hodges' work, organized by the Walker Art Center and the Dallas Museum of Art, is scheduled for 2013/2014. Hodges currently lives and works in New York City.

We are pleased to present an exhibition of new work by Lari Pittman. In this exhibition, Pittman presents both large and small-scale works that reflect upon themes of musicality and time, intimately linking each within an engrossing tableaux of Dutch still-lifes, images of guitars, portraiture and words connoting musical styles. While Pittman's visual vocabulary has continually tested the limits of metaphor, meaning and aesthetics, these works address an emotive intensity that is at once personal and universal in its meditation upon time, mortality, longing and loss. In his new body of work, Pittman further mines a myriad range of sources to create a richly evocative mixture of readymade iconography and his own symbolic language, deftly moving between recognizable motifs and the shifting resonances of his uncanny forms. These densely layered surfaces are shaped by a collision of imagery that speedily oscillates among Pittman's varied mark-making techniques to generate a simultaneity of formal and narrative events. Often organizing each exhibition thematically, Pittman revisits this structure to establish a "music room" that focuses upon a series of five paintings inspired by a tradition of Spanish and Portuguese musical genres related to deep emotional states, such as sorrow, yearning and lament. In these paintings, Pittman links the underlying musicality inherent in his work to images of guitars, still-lifes with fish and fruit, and words such as "saeta" and "fado," forging connections between the transience of his painterly forms, mortality, and the ineluctable passage of time. Like Pittman's earlier works, these paintings' recurrent undertones of nostalgia point to the lingering traces of personal and collective pasts that Pittman revives with a bittersweet touch. Throughout his career, Pittman has continually probed the repressed conditions of modern art's enterprise (from the decorative to the stylized) to offer ever-evolving fields of aesthetic excess that provides not only images, but cultural, personal, and above all, human moments. Born in 1952 in Glendale, California, Lari Pittman has been awarded the J. Paul Getty Trust Fund for the Visual Arts Fellowship Grant in Painting, National Endowment of the Arts Fellowship Grants in Painting and the Skowhegan Medal for Painting. His recent solo exhibitions include: Institute of Contemporary Art, London; Centre d'Art Contemporain, Geneva; Los Angeles County Museum of Art; Corcoran Museum, Washington DC; Contemporary Arts Museum, Houston; Villa Arson, Nice, France. Pittman lives and works in Los Angeles, where he is a professor of art at UCLA.

We are pleased to announce an exhibition of new sculpture by Matthew Barney. "DJED" marks Barney's first New York exhibition of the "Ancient Evenings" project, which has been in progress since 2007. Featuring three large-scale sculptures, this exhibition represents a departure from Barney's signature materials, presenting his first major works produced from traditional sculptural and industrial metals such as iron, bronze, lead and copper. The exhibition will also include new drawings, which delicately map the character and thematic development of the project. "Ancient Evenings" is a multi-part project structured as a site-specific opera in collaboration with Jonathan Bepler, loosely based on Norman Mailer's 1983 novel of the same title. Set in ancient Egypt, Mailer's novel chronicles the seven stages of the soul's progression through death and rebirth according to Egyptian mythology, as told through the story of one man. While Mailer's narrative focuses on the transformation of the human body, Barney enacts the recurring cycles of reincarnation through the use of an automobile, creating a contemporary allegory of death and rebirth within the American industrial landscape. The sculptures on view are both formally and conceptually related to the 1967 Chrysler Crown Imperial from Cremaster 3. Revolving around three generations of American automobile design, the "Ancient Evenings" narrative is rooted in the reincarnation of its leading protagonist, the Chrysler Imperial. Throughout "Ancient Evenings," the figure of the Chrysler Imperial both embodies the narrative of the project and carries it forward, weaving together the genealogies of material and myth into sculptural form. The centerpiece of the exhibition, DJED, is a monumental cast iron sculpture that was poured during a live performance of the opera's third act in 2010. The primary form of DJED is the undercarriage of the Chrysler Imperial, modified to evoke the pillar-like hieroglyph of the Egyptian god Osiris' power. For this work, twenty-five tons of molten iron were poured from five custom-built furnaces into an open, molded pit in the earth at the site of a derelict steel mill along the Detroit River. "Ancient Evenings" continues Barney's program of the last twenty years, in which narrative sculpture is generated through a complex system of storytelling that intertwines personal, historical, and modern mythologies. Matthew Barney was born in San Francisco in 1967 and lives and works in New York. One person exhibitions include: "The Cremaster Cycle," organized by the Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, New York, which traveled to Museum Ludwig, Cologne and Musée d'Art Moderne de la Ville de Paris. "Drawing Restraint," organized by the 21st Century Museum for Contemporary Art, Kanazawa, Japan, which traveled to Leeum Samsung Museum of Art, Seoul; San Francisco Museum of Modern Art; Serpentine Gallery, London; and Kunsthalle Vienna. The exhibition "Matthew Barney: Prayer Sheet with the Wound and the Nail" was on view at Schaulager/Laurenz Foundation in Basel, Switzerland in 2010. Barney has received numerous awards including the Aperto prize at the 1993 Venice Biennale; the Hugo Boss Award in 1996; the 2007 Kaiser Ring Award in Goslar, Germany and the San Francisco International Film Festival's Persistence of Vision Award in 2011.

We are pleased to announce our fifth exhibition of work by French artist Jean-Luc Mylayne and his first at the Brussels location. For over three decades Mylayne, along with his partner and collaborator, Mylène, have dedicated themselves to an artistic pursuit that is both deeply personal in practice and universal in poetic observations upon human nature and the metaphysical. In his large format color photographs, Mylayne further explores the impulses that first led him to create his compelling meditations upon art and ornithology. Having abandoned the modern conventions of owning a house, car and material possessions in pursuit of a nomadic life devoted to the creation of his work, Mylayne tenderly captures the natural world and its avian inhabitants. This exhibition features works from two series: one shot during a two-year Lannan Foundation residency in Bernal, New Mexico, and Fort Davis, Texas and the second shot in France, among apple orchards. Continuing his ongoing project to photograph birds in their natural environment, Mylayne's artistic endeavor is powerfully bound to the precise intersection between observation, time and site. The title of each work is numbered and dated according to the month and year of its execution, a strategy that reveals Mylayne's methodical working practice and commitment to recording the conditions of time. Choosing each location very carefully, Mylayne spends months and sometimes years studying the behavioral activities and movement of birds, waiting for the moment at which the bird and the observer coalesce, blurring the line between subject and artist. Whether posed still on a branch or blurred in motion, the birds that Mylayne photographs appear to relate equally to their context as to their role in front of the camera. As the artist says: "The bird didn't just consent to a picture. He posed, allowing me to take this portrait. It took two years to achieve this result. And it isn't just about understanding the life of birds. Above all, it is an exploration, a way to try and to know ourselves, what we do and why we do it, through the bird." Jean-Luc Mylayne was born in France in 1946. Mylayne's work has been the subject of numerous solo exhibitions at institutions throughout the U.S. and abroad, including his recent exhibition at: Museo Reina Sofia, Madrid, Spain; Lannan Foundation, Santa Fe, New Mexico; Musée d'art contemporain de Lyon; Blaffer Art Museum, University of Houston; Parrish Art Museum, Southampton, NY, among many others. Mylayne's work is currently featured in "ILLUMInazioni" curated by Bice Curiger, at the 54th Venice Biennale, on view through November 27, 2011.

We are pleased to announce "The Unfinished Film," an exhibition curated by Thomas Beard. What can be learned from unfinished films, from works that arrive to us as fragments? Considered collectively—from Erich von Stroheim's Queen Kelly to Sergei Eisenstein's Que Viva Mexico! to Orson Welles's The Other Side of the Wind and beyond—perhaps they constitute a secret canon, the most raw and, in turn, revealing sides of an artist's practice. Included in the show are projects that are intentionally unfinished as well as those abandoned out of frustration, halted by dwindling resources, cut short by death, or curtailed by political circumstance. Representing cinema in a wide range of intermediary states, these are works that unveil the particularities of their origins, lay bare the vicissitudes of their process and production. At the heart of the exhibition will be a black box theater with a regular, daily schedule of unfinished films and related works, many of which are rarely screened and some that have never before been exhibited publicly. The lineup—whose diverse contents feature the oneiric episodes of Harry Smith and Leslie Thornton alongside the incisive essays of Godard/Miéville and Pasolini—is anchored by the ultimate unfinished film, Hollis Frampton's Magellan. In its final form, Frampton's epic cycle was to contain nearly 1,000 films totaling 36 hours in length that would unfold over an entire calendar year, though only a fraction of these were completed. The serial project, metaphorically modeled on Magellan's circumnavigation of the globe, was to consume the last decade of Frampton's career and its many ambitions included the "making of a coherent body of work that shall systematically map the terrain of film art, together with its boundaries, according to poetic principles extrapolated or induced from film's irrational natural history," or, put simply, "making film over as it should have been." Accompanying the programs presented in the cinema will be a constellation of ephemera and works on paper, such as Kenneth Anger's drawings for Puce Women, the unmade, feature-length version of Puce Moment, and Joseph Cornell's scenario Monsieur Phot, represented by an edition that Cornell gave to Susan Sontag when they began their correspondence in the mid-1960s. A number of these pieces maintain a more diagrammatic character, like Dziga Vertov's 1936 schema for his unrealized "creative laboratory," or Paul Sharits' drawings for Passare, a piece that was conceived as a lengthy, many-chaptered film series, but which had its final life as a suite of meticulous, multi-colored notational systems. Here and elsewhere in the show, the work on view is accompanied by another, imagined work, born out of the fantasy of the original's completion. Said another way, as Frampton did when comparing Magellan to Tatlin's Monument to the Third International, "The Monument was not built. There are other ways to build monuments. The ways to build them are to build them immaterially, in the mind." "The Unfinished Film" will be accompanied by a publication with texts by Giorgio Agamben, Theresa Hak Kyung Cha, Hollis Frampton, Sergei Eisenstein, Oskar Fischinger, Gregory Markopoulos, Annette Michelson, Robert Smithson, and Dziga Vertov. Thomas Beard is a founder and director of Light Industry, a venue for film and electronic art in Brooklyn, New York. He recently co-curated the cinema for Greater New York 2010 at MoMA PS1 and is currently working on the film program for the 2012 Whitney Biennial.

We are pleased to announce our first exhibition of works by Jack Smith. Following his arrival in New York in 1953, Smith became one of the most influential members of the American avant-garde and a central figure in the cultural history of the film, performance, and art of downtown New York. Curated by Neville Wakefield, this exhibition will present 12 recently restored films as well as a selection of drawings, collages, never before seen color photographs, black-and-white photographs, and two seminal slide shows. Three collaborative works will also be on view, in which artists Ryan McNamara, A.L. Steiner, and T.J. Wilcox appropriate heretofore unseen Jack Smith film material to create contemporary meditations on Smith's fascinating life and work. Wakefield has conceived of his curatorial endeavor as a tributary approach to Smith's creative practice and panoptic production, writing: "More than almost any artist of the last century Jack Smith understood that within the prevailing cultures of success, art's greatest role may have been to provide provision for public failure. To this end his actors and accomplices, props and lighting, drugs and desires were invariably wrong: wrong before the performance had started – before even the lights had gone down. The marathon of tourettic revisions, false starts and delays signaled to the world the impossibility of creating anything of value in a rectilinear lagoon where even the dedicated and willing were dragged to the bottom-feeding level of landlords and lobsters. Yet out of these impossible conditions was born the stuff of exquisite beauty, radical politics, lurid, caustic, pornographic and often hilarious evocations of the sexual and social strata in which we find ourselves. Much of this endures even in conditions Smith would have most likely have loathed. But the fact that the same frictions that heated and formed his work continue to frustrate curators as well as inflame and inspire artists – including those who have agreed to continue the spirit and legacy with works created for this show - is, I hope, testament to the enduring power and influence of Jack Smith's extraordinary art." A special film program will take place on Saturdays from 4-6 pm during the run of the exhibition, wherein newly restored Jack Smith prints will be screened on 16mm celluloid. The films will be introduced by film historians, scholars, friends and collaborators of Jack Smith. The Saturday series will present a rare opportunity to see these eleven film prints in the context of the artist's larger body of work. Film Screening Schedule: May 7 Uzi Parnes will introduce: Flaming Creatures, 1962-63 43 minutes Scotch Tape, 1959-62 3 minutes Overstimulated, 1959-63 5 minutes Respectable Creatures, 1950- 66 24 minutes Uzi Parnes, Ph.D., is a filmmaker and photographer who was a friend of Jack Smith. He works frequently with Ela Troyano and Carmelita Tropicana and photographed Smith from 1982-89. May 14 Penny Arcade will introduce: Hot Air Specialists, 1980s 7 minutes Jungle Island, 1967 20 minutes Yellow Sequence, 1963-65 15 minutes I Was A Male Yvonne DeCarlo, 1967 – 70s 28 minutes Penny Arcade is an internationally acclaimed performance artist, writer and cultural icon. A teenage superstar in Andy Warhol's Factory and featured in the film Women In Revolt, Penny Arcade saved Jack Smith's work at his death and with film critic J Hoberman formed Jack Smith's archive The Plaster Foundation, restoring all of Smith's films and working tirelessly for 20 years to insure that his legacy would be available to the world when the world became ready. May 21 Jerry Tartaglia will introduce: Normal Love, 1963-65 120 minutes Jerry Tartaglia is a filmmaker whose work in Queer cinema spans four decades. In the early 1990s he began work on the restoration of the films of Jack Smith, following the maxim that no good deed goes unpunished. June 4 Ela Troyano will introduce: No President, 1967-70 45 minutes Song For Rent, 1969 4 minutes Ela Troyano is a Cuban born filmmaker based in New York City. She met Jack Smith after his play The Secret of Rented Island in 1976 and was friends with him until his death from AIDS related illnesses in 1989. Jack Smith was born in Columbus, Ohio in 1932 and died in New York in 1989. In 1998 PS1 mounted a retrospective of Jack Smith's work that traveled to the Warhol Museum in Pittsburgh. Gladstone Gallery has represented the Estate of Jack Smith since 2008.

We are pleased to announce our first exhibition of works by Keith Haring. In 1982, Barbara Gladstone commissioned Haring to make a series of lithographs that were the first prints ever made by the artist, therefore it is with great pleasure that we present this exhibition. Long recognized as a leading figure in the energetic and innovative downtown culture of New York in the 1980s, this brilliantly inventive and prolific artist consistently forged new creative territories throughout his life and work that profoundly reflected his deep insight into the cultural zeitgeist of his day. While Haring's animated contours and a pop-graffiti aesthetic are most closely associated with his signature iconography such as the radiant baby and barking dog, many of the underlying themes of his work were founded upon culturally subversive attitudes towards sexuality, gender, religion, and politics. Born in Reading, Pennsylvania, Haring arrived in New York in 1978 at the age of 19 when he enrolled in the School of Visual Arts. During this period, Haring began to establish a visual language that was centered upon dynamic mark-making techniques, compositional structures and, most importantly, the immediate primacy of the line, which would serve as the foundation of his artistic inspiration throughout his career. Influenced by an eclectic range of references including the work of Pierre Alechinsky, graffitied subway cars, comic book strips, and William Burroughs, the origins and development of Haring's work remained consistently rooted in his commitment to the irreducible principals of drawing. Presenting previously unseen works on paper, this exhibition focuses on the evolutionary period of Haring's early drawings, which traces the development of his formal language and elaborative visual vocabulary. Created in conjunction with a series of Bill T. Jones performances held in 1982 at The Kitchen, these three monumental works on view demonstrate the striking fluidity of Haring's bold graphics and his innate mastery of the optical possibilities of form and space. Executed in real time during Jones' dance performances—functioning as active set pieces with the sound of Haring's brushstrokes serving as the only audio accompaniment —these works entrench the viewer in a field of interlocking geometries and spatial patterning, coalescing into an intimately constructed all-over effect. This exhibition will also present a selection of Haring's early sketchbook drawings, which capture the period when he was avidly exploring his artistic impulses and initiating the working processes through which the basic components of his practice and aesthetic sensibility would take shape. Haring's meticulously angular pen and ink compositions and loose, gestural graphite lines exemplify the opposing forces at play that would later become the enduring tenets of his work. Fusing the multiple strains of his early drawings, Haring generated a uniquely singular graphic vision that he pursued with unwavering conviction, dedication and spirit. Keith Haring was born on May 4th, 1958. In 1990 Haring died at the age of 31 of AIDS-related illnesses in New York. Since his death, his work has been the subject of several international retrospectives. His work is in major private and public collections, including, The Museum of Modern Art; The Whitney Museum of American Art; Los Angeles County Museum of Art; The Art Institute of Chicago; the Bass Museum, Miami; Centre Georges Pompidou, Paris; Ludwig Museum, Cologne; and Stedelijk Museum, Amsterdam. "Keith Haring: 1978-1982," is currently on view at the Contemporary Art Center in Cincinnati through September 5, 2011 and was co-organized by Kunsthalle Wien.

We are pleased to announce an exhibition of new paintings by Carroll Dunham. For more than three decades Dunham's artistic practice has continually engaged the growing tensions that underlie the act of painting and its art historical legacy. Following multiple courses from his animated metamorphic shape-making, lifted from the knotted surfaces of wood paneling, to the psychic inscriptions of the libidinal, Dunham moves skillfully over the ever closing gap between abstraction and representation. Probing the pictorial possibilities of this painterly paradigm, Dunham's visual language vacillates between the nameable and unnamable – an impulse that addresses the mutability of his motifs while recording the very stakes of this endeavor. In these five paintings, Dunham revisits the pastoral landscape and the female bathers that he first established in 2009. Situated in varying ecstatic poses with arms extended out and upwards, legs submerged under translucent washes of bright and dirty blues and hair splayed in bold graphic lines, Dunham's figures are both in and of their surroundings, composed of recurring motifs that are at once subject matter and formal devices. In these works, several of Dunham's bathers are caught in transitive states, revealing newly composed profile and frontal views that not only register a shift in the pictorial plane, but also mark Dunham's own drive to excavate his visual vocabulary for alternative variables. In these works, Dunham pushes color, form, and line to build compositional pressures that complicate the primacy of the figure-ground relationship, employing unusual cropping and perspectival strategies that seem to entangle the bather and her environ in an irrepressible interplay of exuberant geometries. Carroll Dunham was born in 1949 and currently lives and works in New York and Connecticut. He has been the subject of numerous one-person exhibitions, including a mid-career retrospective at the New Museum in New York and an exhibition of paintings and sculptures at Millesgården in Stockholm. His work has been included in several Whitney Biennials and in "Disparaties and Deformations: Our Grotesque," SITE Santa Fe's fifth biennial curated by Robert Storr. In 2010, the University Art Gallery at the State University of New York, Albany presented a survey of Dunham's prints. An upcoming exhibition of new works on paper will be on view at Patrick de Brock Gallery in Knokke-Heist, Belgium, opening April 23, 2011.

We are pleased to announce our fifth exhibition with Gary Hill. Long known for his unique combination of video, sound, performance and installation, Hill has continuously offered multilayered investigations into the phenomenological nature of how we perceive the world through a network of visual, aural and linguistic signals. Exploring the cognitive and sensorial conditions that underlie our discursive modes of communication, Hill experiments with the material and sonic properties of language to offer provocative meditations upon the production of meaning within our everyday contexts. Since the early 1970s, Hill's use of video has occupied a central role in his artistic practice, using the medium as a formal site and structure to both examine and deconstruct the power of the image. Concerned with an increasingly homogenized visual culture, Hill disarticulates the primary communicative function of electronic media by playing with sound, speed, and sequence, to produce not only radical ruptures within our normative processes of perception, but also new ways of encountering meaning.Born in 1951 in Santa Monica, California, Gary Hill has been subject of numerous solo exhibitions in museums and institutions worldwide, including: the Fondation Cartier pour l'art contemporain, Paris; San Francisco Museum of Modern Art; Centre Georges Pompidou, Paris; Guggenheim Museum SoHo, New York; Museum für Gegenwartskunst, Basel, Switzerland; Museu d'Art Contemporani, Barcelona, Spain; and Kunstmuseum Wolfsburg, Germany; among others. Hill has received fellowships from the National Endowment for the Arts and the Rockefeller and Guggenheim Foundations, and has been the recipient of numerous awards and honors, including: the Leone d'Oro Prize for Sculpture at the Venice Biennale (1995) and the John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation Fellowship Award (1998).

We are pleased to announce an exhibition of new work by English artist Richard Hughes. Drawing inspiration from the seemingly banal objects of daily life, Hughes' sculptural installations reflect upon instances of the everyday with formal clarity and wit. Often refashioning his subjects using materials such as fiberglass, cast resin, silicone, and polyurethane, Hughes engages us in a process of illusion and artifice, a strategy that continually plays upon our sense of order, knowledge, and perception. However, Hughes is not interested in the meticulous work of trompe-l'oeil effects or methods of mimetic reproduction, instead he transforms the attitude of these objects, allowing them to reclaim their own object-hood through drawing us into moments of suspended time, distilling small events as they unfold. Focused upon the simplicity of these aesthetic arrangements, such as a bike tire contentedly slung around a pipe, a burning matchstick placed upon a shelf, or a blanketed motorcycle, Hughes directs our attention to the destiny of these objects and the inescapable poetics of our everyday narratives. Born in Birmingham, England in 1974, Hughes' work has been included in exhibitions at various international institutions, including: Sculpture Court, Tate Britain, London; The Showroom, London, "Mapping the studio: Artists from the François Pinault Collection," Punta della Dogana, Venice, Italy; Carnegie Museum of Art, Pittsburgh, PA; Schirn Kunsthalle, Frankfurt, Germany; Baltic Centre for Contemporary Art, Gateshead, U.K.; Kunstverein Heidelberg, Germany; and The Drawing Room, London. Hughes was included in the 2006 Liverpool Biennial as well as nominated for the 2006 Beck's Futures award. His work was included in the accompanying exhibition at the ICI, London.

We are pleased to announce an exhibition of works by Marisa Merz. Born in Turin, Italy, Merz was a central figure and the only woman associated with the Arte Povera movement of the late 1960s and 70s. Known for her unusual use of materials such as copper-wire, clay, and wax, Merz's works reflect the poetic sensibility that delicately entwines her vision of art and life. Consisting of drawings and sculptures, this exhibition continues to investigate Merz's unique and intimate vision of finding meaning within the possibilities of the everyday. One of the most significant themes to arise from Merz's oeuvre is the image of the face, which is centered upon the essential and universal question of being. In these works, the figure of the face emerges as a vestige of the eternal human spirit, capturing a single and infinite moment of appearing and becoming. Composed of fleeting arabesque lines, Merz's figures are disconnected from any social or narrative context. Instead, each reveals a ghostly configuration of abstracted features that defy expressions of individual identity, fixing each in a state of suspended time. Operating within their own temporal logic, these works powerfully mirror Merz's overarching artistic belief in the enduring effect of each artwork beyond its material realization and the constraints of time and place. Through these works Merz's meticulous formal inventions reflect directly the gestures of her psyche, inviting each viewer into the inner spaces of her life. Marisa Merz has been the subject of numerous solo exhibitions at museums including: Centre Internationale d'art et du Paysage, ÎIe de Vassivière, France; Museo d'Arte Contemporanea Donnaregina, Naples, Italy; Stedelijk Museum, Amsterdam; Kunstmuseum Winterthur, Switzerland; and the Centre Georges Pompidou, Paris, among other international venues. Selected group exhibitions include: Kunstmuseum Liechtenstein; CCS Bard/Hessel Museum of Art, Annandale-on-Hudson, New York; Tate Modern, London; and the Hirschhorn Museum, Washington D.C. In 2001 Merz received the Biennale di Venezia Award for lifetime achievement.

someone who saw the work said the following: "The images herein depict mundane and fantastic situations enacted by human and animal souls, figures ill and ecstatic about the situations they have been granted. Some figures cannot help but stare or grab at each other, while others step on their companions, soiling any hope of communion. Their wills, like twisted wicks, burn distinct but unified fires. They are composed of several species but they cannot tell themselves apart, awakening loathsome blood in the veins of each body. With sycophantic excitement they conduct every modern day sacrament—murder, construction, commerce, and hygiene (among others). Yet their tangled wills act not in the name of altruism or holiness, but from their everlasting yearning for life's sweet spots and the age-old wish to dissociate from (or marry) all carnal cravings. These acts set the figures at odds with their surroundings, as flowers ill through winter's scour." Kai Althoff was born in Cologne, Germany in 1966. Althoff has been the subject of solo exhibitions in the U.S. and abroad including: Vancouver Art Gallery; Institute of Contemporary Art, Boston; Museum of Contemporary Art, Chicago; Kunsthalle Zürich; and Simultanhalle, Cologne. His work has also appeared in many group shows at institutions including: CCS Bard, Hessel Museum of Art, New York; San Francisco Museum of Modern Art; Walker Art Center, Minneapolis; Museum of Contemporary Art, Los Angeles; and Schirn Kunsthalle, Frankfurt. Althoff was included in "Of Mice and Men," the 2006 Berlin Biennial. He was most recently included in "Beyond/In Western New York 2010: Alternating Currents" at the Albright-Knox Art Gallery in Buffalo, New York.

We are pleased to announce an exhibition by British artist Sarah Lucas. Since the 1990s, Lucas has been developing a unique material vocabulary using everyday domestic items such as stockings, clothing hangers, lightbulbs, and beer cans to create objects that challenge our collectively inscribed codes of gender, sexual, and social normativity. In this exhibition Lucas uses the male genitalia as her muse, capturing the tension between the representational and the abstract, while retaining the insistent and underlying anxiety imbued in her particular mode of the abject. In this exhibition of new and older works, Lucas continues to explore the themes and ideas at play within her 2008 series of the same title, "Penetralia." Employing similar strategies of production, such as cast concrete, plaster, and fiberglass, these works engage the figure of the phallus with an intense formal clarity and wit. While the symbolic power of the phallus allows Lucas to play with an overt level of content and signification, she is also equally attentive to the basic conditions of the sculptural object implied in composition, weight, balance, and materiality. These aesthetic details animate Lucas' otherwise brute erections, rendering their contours, surface, and structure into an elegant and formal investigation of the phallus. Throughout her work, Lucas has both explicitly and suggestively conjured the image of the penis as both a controversial cultural icon as well as a banal human body part, remarking upon the male organ as the ideal stand-alone sculpture. In drawing parallels between the physicality of both the sculptural object and the male organ, Lucas slyly alludes to the shared history of power and preferences: verticality over horizonality, exterior versus interior, convex versus concave, visibility opposed to invisibility. Linguistic tropes and puns have consistently informed Lucas' multivalent and at times evasive layering of meaning, perfectly exemplified in the title "Penetralia," essentially defined as, "the innermost, the most private or secret parts." This title cleverly conflates its two inter-related terms, the penetrated (the "innermost") and the penetrator (the phallic object), by enacting a slippage in meaning between text and object. A special artist's book by Sarah Lucas and Julian Simmons, made as a companion to the exhibition, will be available in a limited signed edition. Born in Holloway, London in 1962, Lucas has been the subject of numerous major solo exhibitions both nationally and internationally including: Museum of Cycladic Arts, Athens; Kunsthalle Zurich; Milton Keynes Gallery, U.K.; and Museum Boymans-van-Beuningen, Holland.

We are pleased to announce an exhibition of new works by Swiss artist Ugo Rondinone. Continuing to offer a glimpse into his widely discursive practice through meditations on the experiential qualities of the everyday, Rondinone draws upon a multiplicity of artistic tropes and approaches to create immersive and affectively charged environments. Skillfully traversing the boundaries between public and private, interior and exterior, truth and falsity, Rondinone reveals and displaces the processes of how cultural meaning is produced and distributed. Spanning a wide range of material production, from video to neon signage, this exhibition focuses on new figurative sculptures, which like the whole of Rondinone's work consistently testifies to the strangeness and beauty of human life. Since the early 1990's Rondinone has been developing a specific formal and conceptual language around figuration that includes an expansive group of sculptural and photographic self-portraits as well as his clown series. Established as a thematic extension of these earlier works, this exhibition continues to explore similar aesthetic strategies of engagement in which Rondinone generates often unsettling contexts that reflect upon existentialist expressions of the human condition. Made from a mixture of wax and earth pigments, these seven human-scale figures modestly line the walls of the gallery space, each positioned in a pose of hermetic contemplation that gives way to a site of serenity. While the exhibition title "nude" most commonly connotes bare or naked, it also implies a kind of primary, exposed and reductive state, which Rondinone mirrors by stripping the scene of narrative action, a decision that momentarily suspends the outside world and its referential character in an appeal to the conditions of our present state of consciousness. Accentuating the vast dimensions of the room and its abyss-like emptiness, Rondinone's interplay of sculpture and architecture elicits a sensorial encounter, highlighting both the passivity of the figures and the spatial void at the core of this scenario. By staging this setting for existential reflection, Rondinone plays with the co-constitutive forces of artifice and authenticity, unfixing the grounds upon which they operate and allowing the imminent ruminations upon Being to briefly and reflexively take hold among his poetic reshuffling of truth and meaning. Born in 1964 in Brunnen, Switzerland, Rondinone's work has most recently been the subject of solo exhibitions at Kunsthaus Aargauer, Switzerland and Museo de Arte Contemporéneo de Castilla y León, Spain. In 2007 he represented Switzerland in the 52nd Venice Biennial as well as curated "The Third Mind" at Palais de Tokyo in Paris. He currently lives and works in New York. Rondinone's five tree sculptures will concurrently be on view at the IBM Building at 590 Madison Avenue in New York.

We are pleased to announce our first exhibition of work with Kenyan born, New York based artist Wangechi Mutu. Spanning a wide range of media, Mutu employs interventionist methods of collage and assemblage to inventively critique the institutions of power and representation that regulate both the aesthetic and symbolic status of the gendered and racialized body. Mining such diverse sources as fashion magazines, pornography, and documentary photographs, Mutu's striking combination of the surreal, grotesque, and seductive reflects the underlying currents of violence and psycho-sexual tension embedded within the legacy of colonial discourse and the American subconscious at large. This exhibition will feature new large-scale collage works as well as a series of sculptural figurines, which create a dynamic exchange between image and object. Made from ceramic, these moth-like creatures investigate the links between a collection's indexical condition and the fetishization of its subject. Further exploring the hybridized female forms that populate much of her work, Mutu's variegated surfaces move decisively between dense layers of spliced images, glitter, paint, and beads to the swirling calligraphic markings of snakes and hair that give voice to these dystopic scenes of desire, horror, and excess. Mutu's formal methods of collage and montage allow for a mixing of photographic genres and styles culled from the mass media—a representational strategy that not only resists binary determinations but complicates and disrupts the very terms upon which we read images. Through the often jarring incongruities between her collaged elements, from the performative sexuality of pornographic poses to the ethno-centric bodies captured under the anthropological gaze of National Geographic, Mutu plays with the effects of displacement by constructing images that are always already dysfunctional, disordered and destabilizing. What Mutu brilliantly establishes in her charged environments and fantastical tableau is a framework that challenges the question of difference and its attending modes of address, suggesting that resolving these issues is, to borrow the words of the theorist Barbara Johnson, "always a function of a specific interlocutionary situation—and the answers, matters of strategy rather than truth." Born in 1972 in Nairobi, Mutu received her MFA from Yale University. Mutu's work has been the subject of solo shows throughout the U.S. and abroad including: Wiels, Brussels; Deutsche Guggenheim, Berlin; Art Gallery of Ontario; San Francisco Museum of Modern Art; and the Miami Art Museum. Her work has also appeared in numerous group shows at institutions including: Gotesborgs Kunsthalle, Sweden; Museum of Modern Art, New York; Tate Liverpool, UK; and the Studio Museum, New York.

We are pleased to announce an exhibition of early work by Marisa Merz. Born in 1931 in Turin, Italy, Merz was a central figure and the only woman associated with the Arte Povera movement of the late 1960s and '70s. Known for her unusual use of materials such as copper-wire, clay, and wax, Merz's sculptures and drawings reflect the poetic sensibility that delicately entwines her vision of art and life. Executed in 1966, Untitled (Living Sculpture) consists of a group of sculptural works that acutely demonstrate Merz's attitudes toward form and materiality. This exhibition will feature two works in Merz's series that brilliantly testify to the lasting relevance of her artistic vision. Both works are composed of layered metal sheeting, cut and manipulated to assemble curvilinear bodies of glinting silver surfaces. Merz's ethereal reconstruction of a chair, which plays with figures of domesticity and femininity, makes ordinary objects appear strange and uncanny, as if conjuring a mysterious apparition of itself. Extending from the ceiling to the floor Merz's dangling morphological configuration echoes the sinuous, floating forms of underwater life, a resemblance that beautifully underlines her attention to organic shapes, symbolizing the continuum of growth, transformation, and progress that is at the core of her thinking. Though the contours of the installation embody organic forms, her use of industrial metal sheets illustrates the frequent employment of synthetic materials to simulate natural shapes that is characteristic of the broader Arte Povera movement. Not only are these themes of evolution aesthetically formalized throughout Untitled (Living Sculpture), but they are also deeply connected to Merz's commitment to social change and the radical role art can play in society and culture at large, a belief that has been summed up in her famous remarks: "There has never been any separation between my art and my life." Holding true to this conviction, Merz's work continues to offer a refreshing and richly evocative glimpse into the creative cosmos of one of the most fascinating artists of the 20th century. Marisa Merz has been the subject of numerous solo museum exhibitions including: Museo d'Arte Contemporanea Donnaregina, Naples, Italy; Stedelijk Museum, Amsterdam; Kunstmuseum Winterthur, Switzerland; and the Centre Georges Pompidou, Paris, among other international venues. Selected group exhibitions include: CCS Bard/Hessel Museum of Art, Annandale-on-Hudson, New York; Tate Modern, London; and the Hirschhorn Museum, Washington D.C. In 2001 Merz received the Biennale di Venezia Award for lifetime achievement. Merz's work is featured in "Che Fare?" at the Kunstmuseum Liechtenstein through September 5th. Merz currently has a solo exhibition on view at the Centre Internationale d'art et du Paysage, Ile de Vassivière, France through September 26.

We are pleased to announce our first exhibition with Stockholm based artist Cecilia Edefalk. Through her somber combinations of painting, light projection, video, and cast bronze sculpture, Edefalk's poetic logic provides a network of repetitions, reproductions, and doubling, that probes the uncertain nature of historical memory, time, and the signifying power of light. Often remarking upon her own process-oriented practice, Edefalk's scenarios carve out haunting exchanges between past and present, where unexpected connections unfold with sudden clarity. Elegantly asserting the material function of each medium, Edefalk elucidates her rigorous synthesis of the formal and theoretical into a larger, overarching investigation of the paradigmatic dualities that shape the thematics at play within her work. Bringing together a group of new and earlier works, Edefalk continues to inhabit the interstices between the personal, cultural, and historical that together create a complex layering of feeling, knowledge, and meaning that reifies our everyday lived experience. Inspired by the falling of a birch tree, Edefalk's bronze works provide an autobiographical account of this traumatic moment of death and fragmentation; an homage to both the tree itself, as well as to the reflexive processes of memorial and mourning. Molded from the same singular branch, Edefalk situates these cast bronze skins vertically erect, poised in a totemic fashion as if animated by their own metonymic possibilities. Frequently alluding to the cyclical motions of the natural world, Edefalk's vision of the spiritual interconnectedness between all elements appears mirrored in both form and content, establishing a methodological act of conjuring and recalling those systems of remembrance and memory. While Edefalk's practice is circumscribed by an intuitive and often deeply personal approach to art-making, the consistent use of repetition and seriality in her modes of production points to the ways in which Edefalk brilliantly maneuvers expectations of authorship and authenticity with elusive precision. Born in 1954 in Stockholm, Sweden, Edefalk has been the subject of one person museum exhibitions including: Lunds Kunsthalle, Sweden; Kunsthalle Kiel, Germany; Art Institute of Chicago; and Moderna Museet, Stockholm. Her work has appeared in several group shows including: Kunsthalle Bern, Switzerland; Wadsworth Atheneum Museum of Art, Hartford, Connecticut; Museum für Moderne Kunst, Frankfurt, Germany; Documenta11, Kassel, Germany; Musée d'art moderne de la Ville de Paris; Whitney Museum of American Art, New York; and the São Paolo Biennial. Edefalk lives and works in Stockholm.

We are pleased to present an exhibition focused on a large-scale installation by Sol LeWitt that will occupy the two floors of the gallery. Long established as one of the leading figures in the Conceptual Art movement of the 1960s and '70s, LeWitt continually offered new ways of expanding the possibilities of the artist's role within the circulating channels of artistic creation, production and distribution. Through his vast body of works on paper, structures, and wall drawings, LeWitt makes evident the critical importance of methodology as a way of delimiting the field of artistic invention as well as conflating the expressive function of form, content, surface and support into a rationalist ideal. Conceived in 1995, Wall Drawing 792: Black rectangles and squares underscores LeWitt's early interest in the intersections between art and architecture, which he distinguished and admired as a practice structured by predetermination, empirical logic, and collaboration. Spanning the two floors of the gallery, this major work consists of varying combinations of black rectangles, creating an irregular grid-like pattern that is representative of LeWitt's use of the elemental shapes and geometries found in the abstractions of the Bauhaus and Russian Constructivism. While aesthetically uniform, the differing scale, design, and dimensions of the gallery's walls demand that each composition consider the unique architectural conditions of the site itself. On view in the garden is a concrete block structure from 2001, which acts as a compelling three-dimensional counterpart to the ideas demonstrated in LeWitt's wall drawing. Motivated by this practical model of architecture, LeWitt developed a framework for identifying the artist as primarily that of a thinker bound to the processes of conceptualization rather than execution, a move that separated him from the romantic tradition of the artist as maker. Rejecting the ideological imperatives of Abstract Expressionism, LeWitt and his fellow allies established a counter polemic constituted by attitudes towards issues of non-hierarchy, repetition, and serialism, which centered upon the motif of the grid. Through both his elegant charting of the axiomatics of the surface space as well the stoicism of his concrete structure, LeWitt invites us to reflect upon the phenomenological effects of our unfolding experience, marking his continual insistence upon capturing the indomitable presence of the human mind. Sol LeWitt (1928-2007) has been the subject of numerous major retrospectives at museums worldwide, including the Museum of Modern Art, New York; the Tate Gallery, London; the Kunsthalle Bern, and a long term exhibition of105 wall drawings at Mass MoCA, Massachusetts on view through 2033, among other international venues. His work remains in the collections of countless prominent art institutions, such as the Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, the Whitney Museum of American Art, and the Centre National d'Art Moderne Georges Pompidou.

We are pleased to announce The Mass Ornament, an exhibition curated by John Rasmussen. This group exhibition takes its title from a collection of essays by the German writer and cultural critic Siegfried Kraucauer that were originally published in the 1920s and 1930s in the feuilleton section of the Frankfurter Zeitung. These essays focused on many topics including dance, religion, film, photography, arcades, and boredom—subjects that characterized the public's rapidly shifting relationship to the city, mass culture, and politics during the Weimar Era. The fourteen artists included in the exhibition work across the various media of painting, sculpture, photography and video and recall Kracauer's ideas through shared interests in vanitas, ornament, morbidity, and the fragmented figure. While some of the works in the exhibition bear a more direct association to the subject matter of the essays in The Mass Ornament, there is perhaps more of a commonality between these artists and Kracauer's method of employing "surface" as a site of cultural productivity. Often less political, these artists nevertheless engage with his sense of "hesitant openness" in their use of marginalized mediums, minor histories, mythology and gallows humor. The works included in the exhibition develop a provisional language that seeks to limit or remove standard associations with the specificity of media. Their quiet surfaces adopt strategies of deference that reveal a critical (and at times caustic) relationship to our increasingly choreographed political and social arena. Participating artists include: Patricia Esquivias, Matias Faldbakken, Jay Heikes, Patrick Hill, Lisa Lapinski, Nick Mauss, Michaela Meise, Silke Otto-Knapp, Maha Saab, Gedi Sibony, Alina Szapocznikow, Ned Vena, John Williams and David Zink Yi. John Rasmussen is the Executive Director and Curator at Minneapolis' Midway Contemporary Art. Since founding Midway in 2001, Rasmussen has organized fifty exhibitions and projects that have been the US institutional premieres of many artists including: Omer Fast, Guyton\Walker, Matias Faldbakken, Lisa Lapinski, Gedi Sibony, Michaela Meise, David Lieske, Nate Lowman, and Anthony Pearson.

We are pleased to announce an exhibition of new work by artist Raymond Pettibon. Long recognized for his singular works combining text and figuration, Pettibon merges disparate elements of American iconography, re-inscribing strange and often obscured meanings into normative narrative structures reminiscent of comic strips and advertising. Emerging from the Southern California punk culture, where he was closely associated with the legendary band, Black Flag, Pettibon's works on paper, wall drawings and films, capture the underlying forces that dominate and determine the conditions of the American psyche. In this exhibition of new works, Pettibon continues to expand upon strategies of collage, drawing, and painting that conjure earlier established themes and imagery mined from a myriad of sources including, Noir and B movies, cult icons, literature, television, political propaganda, and old comic books. This broad range of historical references not only foregrounds Pettibon's own interest in appropriating past visual and literary styles, but also invokes the schizophrenic and pathological impulses at work in the American imaginary. Cultural relics such as Gumby, Charles Manson, the atomic mushroom cloud, and the dollar sign, regularly appear, meticulously coupled with Pettibon's textual insights inspired by William Blake, vernacular speech, and pulp magazines. As the use of color has played an increasingly central role in these more recent works, so has the formal concern for surface, space, and technique, resulting in densely populated and fragmentary images that further articulate Pettibon's refusal to offer conventional narrative logic. Often at once perversely funny and poetically contemplative, Pettibon's power lies in his ability to occupy multiple positions at once, and ultimately to implicate text and image in a slippery production of meaning. Born in 1957 in Tucson, Arizona, Raymond Pettibon received his BA at UCLA in Los Angeles, California. Pettibon's work has been the subject of numerous solo and group exhibitions throughout the U.S. and abroad, including the Whitney Biennial, Louisiana Museum of Art, Denmark, Walker Art Center, Minneapolis, The Philadelphia Museum of Art and the Museum of Modern Art, New York. Pettibon was the recipient of the 2004 Whitney Biennial Bucksbaum award and the 2010 Oskar Kokoschka Prize. Pettibon currently lives and works in Hermosa Beach, California.

We are pleased to announce I magnifici sette by Italian artist Fausto Melotti. A quiet presence throughout the twentieth century, Melotti began exhibiting his work in the 1930s after studying both music and science. Primarily known for sculpture, his initial ceramic Teatrini—poetic dioramas in which lyrical figuration populates miniature theaters—gave way in the 1950s to abstract works composed of elegantly composed brass, wire, and other metals. His background informed his new formal language in which the plastic manifestation of material and form found a corollary in the almost mathematical elegance of both the rhythms and visual structures of music and musical notation. As Melotti said, "Art is an angelic, geometric feeling. It addresses the intellect, not the senses." In his works, poetic structures of feeling find a medium in response to self-contained abstract forms regardless of haptic modeling, much in the way music conveys meaning through an immaterial sonic construction. This exhibition will present one monumental work I magnifici sette (The magnificent seven), 1973, a brass and stainless steel sculpture in which seven abstract forms recall the seven disciplines classically defined as the liberal arts—the fields of study that the ancient Greeks thought allowed for a rational understanding of the world. In Melotti's depiction, seven window-like forms contain rhythmic patterns of geometries bound less by platonic ideals than by a more lyrical contemplation of composition, balance, and order. Recalling non-western forms of musical notation, this sculpture's quasi-linguistic ordering provokes both contemplation and a necessary respect for the universal presence of the unexpected and uncertain. Of this poetic sensibility of uncertainty Melotti said in his 1963 aphorism: "It is not for us to know, though a genius might, whether the thousand effervescent thoughts, so much in contrast today, like never before, are beginning to agree like the voices in a choir, to finally emerge together in a single voice or whether it shall all collapse in a dark torrent…. We would be content if it were the wind of the Elysian fields, shaking and rattling the empty and sensitive pipes." Born in Rovereto, Italy, to a musical family, Fausto Melotti (1901-1986) began studying music, mathematics and physics before enrolling at the prestigious Accademia di Belle Arti di Brera in Milan where he befriended fellow artist Lucio Fontana. His first exhibition was at the Galleria del Milione in Milan in 1935. The Museum am Ostwall Dortmund held the first retrospective of his work in 1971. He exhibited in both Italy and abroad up until his death. The1986 Venice Biennale opened with a major exhibition of Melotti's work, earning him a posthumous Leone d'Oro.

We are pleased to present the first solo New York gallery exhibition by Cameron Jamie. Jamie works in various media including drawing, sculpture, film and performance, often using found materials and footage or commissioned collaborations as a method to track the accretion of the surreal in everyday life. Locating much of his work within a matrix of fringe culture or bizarre happenings, he turns a canny yet aesthetic eye on ritual and practice to open up symbolic structures to re-appropriation and the possibilities of transferred meanings. Simultaneously an outsider and an insider, Jamie's work pushes the index of cultural totems to a hallucinatory pitch. For this exhibition, Jamie will present a work entitled Smiling Disease, an installation comprised of drawing and sculpture exhibiting his fascination with the notion of masks as a form of portraiture. Beginning with a series of works on paper created through a process of layering ink, Jamie's singular line reveals inchoate figures and hallucinatory anatomy. It is from these beginnings that characters represented by the masks emerge. The carving style and technique are loosely based upon a ritualized Alpine tradition of ornate wooden masks called Perchten; however, Jamie uses the craft as a conduit to embody the grotesque faces and figures—with features such as horns, scraggly beards, and misshapen mouths and teeth—that have long populated his work. Just as in his earlier pieces when Jamie explored the most far-a-field manifestations of such sub-cultural phenomenon as the Spook Houses in Detroit and backyard wrestling of his native San Fernando Valley, he is not merely dissecting fringe cultures under an anthropological gaze. Rather, Jamie dismantles and then reassembles both arcane and well-known forms and scenarios to create a new aesthetic experience. With this installation, he reinforces the notion of masks as a generative source for identity as created through the heterogeneous layering of form and practice. Cameron Jamie was born in Los Angeles, California in 1969 and lives and works in Paris, France. Jamie's first U.S. solo museum exhibition was held in 2006 at Walker Art Center, Minneapolis which traveled to MIT List Visual Arts Center (2007). He has shown his works at major contemporary art venues and at film festivals including the Whitney Biennial (2006) and the Venice Biennale (2005). His work has been included in a number of group exhibitions, including Legitimate Theater, Los Angeles County Museum of Art, Los Angeles (2001); Try This On, Yerba Buena Center for the Arts, San Francisco, California (2001); and Let's Entertain/Au-dela du spectacle at the Centre Georges Pompidou, Paris, France (2000-2001). In 2008 Jamie was the first recipient of the Yang Hyan Art Prize. This summer his work will be included in the Berlin Biennial.

We are pleased to announce its first exhibition of work by Jim Hodges. Since the late 1980s Hodges has created a broad range of work responding to the events, emotions, and relationships that have filled his life. These deeply affecting works engage varied forms and media, from traditional draftsmanship to more poetic approaches to sculpture and installation, to create a highly reflective vocabulary that speaks to art historical, political, and autobiographical discourses. Charting the overlooked and obvious touchstones of life with equal poignancy, his conceptual practice is as broad and expansive as the range of human experiences he captures. For this exhibition of new work, Hodges will create new sculptures and drawings that mediate on universal themes of mortality, fragility, and the natural world. Using a variety of materials including cast glass and photographs cut to create relief, Hodges intuits form and space through a haptic approach, making tangible not just the plastic possibilities bound into various media, but also the phenomenological aspects that tie materials to lived experience. A photograph of a foliage filled landscape does not remain static, but through Hodges' incisive intervention becomes a dynamic flurry of leaves against a monochromatic field; while a broken mirror becomes an opportunity for deeper reflection. Like the tradition of vanitas paintings, Hodges' pieces work in concert to create a contemplative space in which sculptural process itself becomes a vehicle in which to examine both the singular and shared courses of life. Jim Hodges was born in 1957 in Spokane Washington and received his MFA from Pratt Insitute in Brooklyn, NY. He has been the subject of numerous solo exhibitions at various venues including the Aspen Art Museum; Centro Galego de Arte Contemporanea, Santiago de Compostello, Spain; Tang Teaching Museum and Art Gallery at Skidmore College, Saratoga Springs, NY; and the Museum of Contemporary Art, Chicago. Currently a retrospective of his drawings across various media is on view at the Fondazione Bevilacqua La Masa in Venice, after its premiere at the Centre Georges Pompidou in Paris. This summer it will travel to the Camden Arts Centre in London. In 2009 Hodges curated a two person exhibition "Floating a Boulder: Works by Felix Gonzalez-Torres and Jim Hodges" at the FLAG Art Foundation in New York. He currently Lives and works in New York City.

We are pleased to announce its first exhibition of work by Jim Hodges. Since the late 1980s Hodges has created a broad range of work responding to the events, emotions, and relationships that have filled his life. These deeply affecting works engage varied forms and media, from traditional draftsmanship to more poetic approaches to sculpture and installation, to create a highly reflective vocabulary that speaks to art historical, political, and autobiographical discourses. Charting the overlooked and obvious touchstones of life with equal poignancy, his conceptual practice is as broad and expansive as the range of human experiences he captures. For this exhibition of new work, Hodges will create new sculptures and drawings that mediate on universal themes of mortality, fragility, and the natural world. Using a variety of materials including cast glass and photographs cut to create relief, Hodges intuits form and space through a haptic approach, making tangible not just the plastic possibilities bound into various media, but also the phenomenological aspects that tie materials to lived experience. A photograph of a foliage filled landscape does not remain static, but through Hodges' incisive intervention becomes a dynamic flurry of leaves against a monochromatic field; while a broken mirror becomes an opportunity for deeper reflection. Like the tradition of vanitas paintings, Hodges' pieces work in concert to create a contemplative space in which sculptural process itself becomes a vehicle in which to examine both the singular and shared courses of life. Jim Hodges was born in 1957 in Spokane Washington and received his MFA from Pratt Insitute in Brooklyn, NY. He has been the subject of numerous solo exhibitions at various venues including the Aspen Art Museum; Centro Galego de Arte Contemporanea, Santiago de Compostello, Spain; Tang Teaching Museum and Art Gallery at Skidmore College, Saratoga Springs, NY; and the Museum of Contemporary Art, Chicago. Currently a retrospective of his drawings across various media is on view at the Fondazione Bevilacqua La Masa in Venice, after its premiere at the Centre Georges Pompidou in Paris. This summer it will travel to the Camden Arts Centre in London. In 2009 Hodges curated a two person exhibition "Floating a Boulder: Works by Felix Gonzalez-Torres and Jim Hodges" at the FLAG Art Foundation in New York. He currently Lives and works in New York City.

We are pleased to announce an exhibition by Anna Parkina in the project space. Born in Moscow in 1979, Parkina's work encompasses a variety of media, including collage, sculpture, and performance. In both her works in two and three dimensions, Parkina configures space as a subjective site simultaneously merging images and forms into a composite region. As Kim West writes in the catalogue for 2009 Venice Biennale, where Parkina's work was included in the Italian Pavilion, the work achieves "striking visual effects by folding shapes and buildings, patterns and objects, silhouettes and contours into and out of one another, creating a layered, equivocal surface that may call to mind the impossible constructions and perspectives of Escher or perhaps even the treacherous images of Magritte." For the new body of work on view, entitled "Nests," Parkina combines collage, watercolor and lithography. Her works are often rooted in the language of Soviet era montage and as such seek to overlap space "both mental and physical" in such a way as to create new and charged landscapes. Works like "Pendulum on the fourth floor" in which Parkina superimposes fragments of her face over an image of that most ominous of Soviet Era icons, the super apartment block, exemplify this phenomenon. As Parkina herself says, the viewer may "recognize shapes and details which are totally independent, but [at] the same time it is impossible to separate one detail from the rest as there is almost organic fusion inside of the picture." Anna Parkina was born in 1979 and lives and works in Moscow. She studied at the Art Center College of Design in California and the École des Beaux-Arts in Paris. Her work has been exhibited around the world, including both the Venice Biennale and the Moscow Biennale in 2009. She also runs Tramway, a publishing house which produces artist's books and magazines.

Gladstone Gallery, in collaboration with Team Gallery, is pleased to announce a new installation by Banks Violette. Violette's work ranges from haunting yet exquisitely rendered graphite drawings to sculptural installations composed of cast salt, light, and sound. Throughout his practice, he plumbs the simultaneous degradation and accretion of meaning through the process of mythology, often embodied in forms strongly associated with sub-cultural communities, personal memorials, or historical obscurities. The black and white spectacle of his stark compositions belies the uneasy and fraught allusions of appropriated images and forms reconstructed as vessels of oblivion. For this new installation, Violette continues to mine a rich art historical terrain in which the materials and forms associated with Minimal and Conceptual Art become reactivated as theatrical platforms of performative decay. He pairs a large chandelier composed of multiple fluorescent tubes with a black wall that seems to buckle and melt against the reflection of the light. Both aspects of the installation recall the monochromatic tone and the use of replaceable industrial materials common to Minimalist and Conceptual sculptors such as Donald Judd and Dan Flavin; however, Violette's works seem self-consciously constructed and theatrical. Wires fall in a cascade alongside the chandelier while the apparatus of steel tubes and sandbags supporting the wall remain in plain sight. By exposing these more banal technical necessities, Violette heightens the artificial spectacle of his installation, as if willing these two canonical art historical movements into an internecine danse macabre. He unmasks form and content as sites vulnerable to intellectual vandalism and moribund mythologizing. Banks Violette was born in 1973 and lives and works in New York. His work has been the subject of numerous solo exhibitions, including those at Museum Dhont-Dhaenens in Deurle, Belgium; Kunsthalle Wein; the Modern of Art Museum of Forth Worth, Texas; Kunsthalle Bergen, Norway; and the Whitney Museum of American Art. He has also participated in group exhibitions at The Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, New York; the Migros Museum fur Gegenwartskunst, Zurich; Museum of Modern Art, New York; Palais de Tokyo, Paris; the Royal Academy, London; P.S. 1, New York; the Museum Boijmans van Beuningen, Rotterdam; among others.

We are pleased to announce our third exhibition with Jan Dibbets. Born in the Netherlands in 1941, Dibbets trained to be a painter, but turned to the photographic medium in the late 1960s. Harnessing the potential of photography to elucidate the conceptual variables of optics, his witty yet rigorous investigations of the elastic synthesis between object and space resulted in acute queries of vision and reality. Dibbets' practice often resulted in richly paradoxical photographs such as his "Perspective Correction" series in which trapezoids drawn on his studio wall became perfect squares through the camera's transformation of three-dimensional space into two-dimensional images. Challenging the myth that the photograph never lies, Dibbets fills the assumed paltriness of the reproduced image with a sense of intellectual wonder assumed to be absent from the unequivocality of both the photographic eye and reality. For this new body of work entitled "New Horizons," Dibbets returns to the optical structure that has become his hallmark. As Erik Verhagen says in his recent study of Dibbets' oeuvre, "The horizon is not a subject like other subjects, for it exists only through and in relation to our sense of sight." It is objective and subjective, circular and rectilinear, static and mobile. In these photographs, which conjoin different photographs of a landscape and seascape along the line of the horizon, Dibbets channels it as structuring principle, not only determining space and point of view, but also—in a very painterly way—the composition itself. By subordinating the mobility of the camera to the standardization of a straight line, these panoramas create a subtle tension between the seamlessness of the horizon line and the disjunction of land and sea, only further accentuated by the resulting asymmetrical compositions. The new works in this exhibition continue Dibbets' sentiment when he said "In the whole world what is more beautiful than a straight line? And the horizon is a straight line in three dimensions: it's an almost incredible phenomenon." Jan Dibbets lives and works in Amsterdam. He has had solo exhibitions at Stedelijk Van Abbemuseum, Eindhoven; Kunsthalle, Bern; Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, New York; Walker Art Center, Minneapolis; Detroit Institute of the Arts, Detroit; and Fundacion Espai Poblenau, Barcelona; DePont Stichting voor Hedendaagse Kunst, Tilburg; among others. His work has been included in numerous group exhibitions worldwide, including "In & Out of Amsterdam: Travels in Conceptual Art 1960-1976" which was on view this past summer at the Museum of Modern Art, New York. In February, the Musée d'Art Moderne de la Ville de Paris will present a complete retrospective of Dibbets' "Horizon" series from the1970s until today.

We are pleased to announce an exhibition of new work by Andro Wekua. Creating vivid yet enigmatic tableaux composed of painting, sculpture, collage, and film, Wekua's work explores notions of memory, history, and desire through a mixture of personal iconography and fragmented narrative. Often depicting figures wearing masks or with their eyes blinded, the young men and women seem haunted by their very surroundings—surroundings which recall both the turbulent recent past of Eastern Europe and the stylized decadence of popular culture. For this exhibition, Wekua has created paintings and works on paper depicting individuals from his past that had an influence or impact on various stages of his life, despite not having seen some of them since his adolescence. These portraits blur the lines of tradition by combining aspects of the subject culled from photographs and memories of different points in time: what begins with capturing one moment finds its completion in representing the same person years later. At other times, Wekua will start by painting one individual until he has exhausted his memory and then adds details of another person. These paintings, at times surreal, intermingle figurative and abstract renderings recalling the very phenomenology of remembering: the condensation and screening of memory and the contradiction between personal reminiscence and history. Installing these pieces in spaces lined with wallpaper of his own design, Wekua creates a portrait gallery as hall of mirrors in which the atmosphere recalls both subject and artist simultaneously. In this exhibition, Wekua manipulates the history of a genre long dependent upon both the tension and contradiction of idealization and realism, or, as he says, "A lot of it is fictional but for me it's all very truthful." Andro Wekua was born in 1977 in Georgia, and studied visual arts there and in Basel, Switzerland. He has been the subject of solo exhibitions at numerous museums, including Neue Kunst Halle, St. Gallen, Switzerland; The Rubell Family Collection, Miami; Kunstmuseum Winterthur, Switzerland; Museum Boijmans van Beuningen, Rotterdam; Hydra Workshops, Greece; Camden Arts Center, London; the De Haalen Haarlem; and Le Magasin, Grenoble; and he has participated in various group shows including the 4th Berlin Biennial in 2006. His exhibition "Workshop Report" is currently on view at Wiels, Brussels, having traveled from Museion in Bolzano, Italy.

We are pleased to present a new body of work by Sharon Lockhart. Known for her structural explorations of the ontological boundaries of still and moving images, Lockhart creates photographs and films that at once mine the formal terrain of film and photography while presenting a thoughtful meditation upon her chosen subject. Additionally, Lockhart's methodology requires a close involvement with the communities she depicts, resulting in works that are not only formally acute, but also sociologically insightful. For this new body of work, she has turned her focus toward the workers of Bath Ironworks in Bath, Maine, to consider both the plastic and psychological terrain bound up in structures of labor. In the installation Lunch Break, designed in collaboration with architects Escher Gunewardena, a single tracking shot slowly slides down a locker-filled corridor where the ironworkers eat their lunch. A lyrical evocation of the nexus between the industrial and social, the untethered camera allows for the audience to experience this brief moment of the work-day as a sustained vision and witness the various activities and methods of self-expression that emerge out of it. The soundtrack, designed in collaboration with composer Becky Allen and filmmaker James Benning, weaves the diegetic tones created by worker's voices with industrial sounds and music. In a series of accompanying photographs, Lockhart depicts the workers interacting through both institutionalized and makeshift relations and rituals encompassing spatial, historical, and economic dynamics. This includes a series of independent business run by the ironworkers catering to their coworkers. Finally eighteen more formalized still-lives of the workers' lunch boxes serve as portraits of their owners—in each case, the worker is both framed by and frames the work place. Sharon Lockhart lives and works in Los Angeles and has had solo exhibitions at international venues including Wiener Secession, Austria; Walker Art Center, Minneapolis; Fogg Art Museum at Harvard University, Cambridge; Sala Rekalde, Bilbao, Spain; Museum Boijmans Van Beuningen Rotterdam; Kunsthalle Zürich; Museum of Contemporary Art, Chicago; Wolfsburg Museum, Germany, and MAK-Austrian Museum of Applied Arts, Vienna. Her films have been included in the New York Film Festival, Vienna International Film Festival, Berlin Film Festival, and the Sundance Film Festival, where Lunch Break and Exit were selected in 2009. The Lunch Break exhibition debuted at the Wiener Secession in November, 2008 and will be exhibited at Mildred Lane Kemper Art Museum, Saint Louis, MO in February 2010 and will travel to the Colby Art Museum, ME in July of 2010. The exhibitions will be accompanied by fully illustrated catalogue, which will be released in February 2010.

We are pleased to announce an exhibition of new work by Elizabeth Peyton. Peyton will present a group of works on paper, including watercolors, colored pencil and pastel pencil drawings. Elizabeth Peyton was born in Connecticut in 1965 and currently lives and works in New York. In 1993, she had her first solo show in New York in room 828 in the Hotel Chelsea and has since been the subject of exhibitions at the Kunstmuseum Wolfsburg, the Museum für Gegenwartskunst in Basel, Deichtorhallen in Hamburg, and the Royal Academy in London. Her mid-career survey "Live Forever" opened at the New Museum in New York, traveled to the Walker Arts Center in Minneapolis, The Whitechapel Art Gallery in London, and is currently on view at the Bonnefantenmuseum in Maastricht. She has also been included in numerous group exhibitions around the world including "Campo" at the 1995 Venice Biennale, "Greater New York" at PS1 in 2000, "Cher Pientre, Lieber Maler, Dear Painter" at the Centre Pompidou in 2002, the 2004 Whitney Biennial, and "The Painting of Modern Life" at the Hayward Gallery in London in 2007.

Gladstone Gallery and the Fondazione Alighiero e Boetti, working in close association with the Archivio Alighiero Boetti, are pleased to announce the first ever retrospective entirely dedicated to Alighiero e Boetti's Mappa series. During his second voyage to Afghanistan in 1971, Boetti pondered the idea of the first Mappa: He commissioned Afghan craftswomen, who following the artist's directives, hand-embroidered a map of the world in which the geopolitical boundaries were filled with each country's flag. This first piece began a twenty-year collaboration that continued until the artist's premature death in 1994. Viewed as an ongoing series, they bring to light the man-made divisions drawn over the continents and chart the political realities of the world from the early 1970s through the fall of the Berlin Wall and the collapse of the USSR. The gallery exhibition begins at the genesis of the Mappa series: In Planisfero Politico, 1969, Boetti filled in a standard classroom map with the colored patterns of each country's flag. It links the first Mappa to two earlier geopolitical works, 12 forme dal 10 Giugno 1967, 1967-1971 (12 shape from 10 June 1967), referencing the Israeli occupation along the Gaza Strip during the Six-Day war, and the early embroidery Territori Occupati, 1969. The embroidery of each map normally took one to two years and, in some cases, much longer due to external events. The invasion of Afghanistan by Russian troops in 1979 shifted production from Kabul to Peshawar in Pakistan, where the group of Afghan women had taken refuge. It also halted production completely until 1982, with only a few maps being made between 1982-1985. The flags being the essential trope of the Mappa, Boetti selected the thread and decided on the precise colors connected to them—fastidiously checking for and correcting errors. However, Boetti, seeing the chance mistakes made by the Afghan women, accorded them some freedom as the series continued, particularly in their choice of color for the ocean: blue gave way to pink, green, purple, etc. As flags changed according to new territorial divisions and political identities, the color of the oceans also began to change, presenting colorful visions of the world as a mutable and diverse pattern. The variety of the series is characterized not only by the plurality of color and size but also by the different textual borders in a mix of Farsi script and Italian. The border texts contain dates or details relative to the work's production, Boetti's signature and sayings, as well as excerpts from Sufi poetry. For the Farsi texts, Boetti let men inscribe what they wished, explaining the frequent observations about the plight of Afghan refugees in Pakistan and jihad. It is fundamental to recognize Boetti's global consciousness. His relationship to Afghanistan was not one of exoticism but rather of admiration; his later works took on a less Westernized character and were infused with local artisan tradition. In the Mappa the meticulous technique and skill pushes the viewer to consider the labor involved in the production and, by extension, the passing of time. The Mappa invite the viewer to locate familiar places and note changes along a fabric of time. Introducing playfulness and political consciousness, they remain neutral while connecting the universal and personal spheres. The exhibition will be accompanied by a fully illustrated catalogue edited by Gladstone Gallery and Fondazione Alighiero e Boetti with an essay by Jean-Christophe Amman, who is also the director of the Alighiero e Boetti catalogue raisonné. The first volume of the raisonné is due in 2009 with an Italian and an English edition published by Electa. Alighiero e Boetti (Turin 1940 – Rome 1994) has been the subject of a retrospective exhibition at MADRE, Naples in 2009; other solo exhibitions include Kunsthalle, Basel (1978); Stedelijk Van Abbemuseum, Eidhoven (1986); Kunstverein, Bonn (1992); Centre National d'Art Contemporain, Le Magasin, Grenoble (1993); Museum of Contemporary Art, Los Angeles (1994); Dia Center for Arts, New York (1994); P.S.1 Contemporary Art Center, New York (1994); Galleria Civica d'Arte Moderna, Turin (1996); Galleria Nazionale d'Arte Moderna, Rome (1996); Museum für Moderne Kunst, Franfurt (1998); Whitechapel Gallery, London (1999). The artist took part in Documenta 5 (1972) and Documenta 7 (1982) and the Venice Biennale (1978, 1980, 1986, 1990, 1995). In 2001 the Venice Pavillon was completely dedicated to Alighiero e Boetti's work.

Since the late seventies, Dunham's conceptual approach to painting has volleyed between abstraction and figuration utilizing everything from the knotted surface of wood panels to libidinous psychic manifestations to structure his compositions. As Kate Linker wrote in her essay accompanying the catalogue from a recent exhibition of Dunham's work: "Because [his paintings] are equally inspired by Aztec and Mayan art, recent American art, pornography, and cartoons (to cite only a few sources), these pictographs indicate the long arc of Dunham's imagination and the latitude of his visual reading habits, which range from high to low, rarified to vernacular, artistic 'literature' to esthetic pulp fiction." For the new series on view, Dunham has expanded his exploration of the pastoral landscape that he began with his original tree paintings in 2007. These trees not only sprout large flowers and leaves, but furthermore reveal themselves to be just one aspect of a complicated visual terrain populated with various figures and flora. Much like his "Mule" paintings staged the final act for the male character that occupied his work throughout recent years, Dunham's new landscapes find their structure in the hindquarters of a female bather. His formal mediation of the art historical trope of the nude allows for the collapse of figure and ground into a myth-laden expanse of colonized psychic and formal impulses. Her anatomy becomes both a part and the principal organizing matrix of the landscape, as the fields and lakes of her environs seem to issue directly from the serial contours that formulate her composition. Carroll Dunham was born in 1949 and currently lives and works in New York and Connecticut. He has been the subject of numerous one-person exhibitions, including a mid-career retrospective at the New Museum in New York and an exhibition of paintings and sculptures since 2004 at Millesgarden in Stockholm. His work has been included in several Whitney Biennials and in "Disparaties and Deformations: Our Grotesque," SITE Santa Fe's fifth biennial curated by Robert Storr. In 2008 the Addison Gallery of American Art presented a survey of his prints and an accompanying catalogue raisonne.

Gedi Sibony. Composed of materials that range from the disused to the easily available, Sibony's sculptures consisting of carpet, cardboard, and found objects stage a series of interventions beginning in the artist's studio and ending only during the final installation of the complete exhibition. In this manner, his works strive to create a cohesive scene in which the staging of the object within the space determines its ontological unity. Sibony plays with both the formal and psychological expectations of a gallery exhibition, and in doing so heightens the spatial and plastic intentions embodied in each work. Each work not only relies upon an economics of availability, (objects are often retreived and reversed unaltered), but furthermore charts the organic process from its creation through its transport and finally its installation. Sibony intervenes during each phase so that the individual sculptures, their grouping, and the structure of the exhibition space all bear the consequences of his holistic approach. The result becomes an almost mystical analysis of the mechanics of aesthetics in which Sibony evacuates such binaries as abstraction and figuration, container and contained in favor of the reified relations of object and space. Gedi Sibony lives and works in New York. He is represented by Greene Naftali Gallery, New York. He has been the subject of monographic exhibitions at The Contemporary Art Museum, St. Louis, Missouri; Kunsthalle St. Gallen, Switzerland; FRAC Champagne-Ardenne, Reims, France; and Midway Contemporary Art, Minneapolis, MN. In addition he has been included in numerous group exhibitions including "Unmonumental" at the New Museum for Contemporary Art, New York ; "Day for Night," the 2006 Whitney Biennial; and Greater New York 2005, PS1 Contemporary Art Center.

We are pleased to announce its first exhibition with artist Damián Ortega. Beginning his career as a political cartoonist, Ortega teases out the social conflicts embedded in even the most banal objects. In his films, sculptures, and other works he deconstructs the economic and political relationships bound together in commodities ranging from automobiles to tools. The creation of these whimsical new spatial relationships reacts with the viewer to establish a demystified reading of the history of the object leaving only its social significations intact. In this new body of work, Ortega created a series of concrete and brick blocks by pressure sanding them into irregular shapes. Equating the loss of material with both geological erosion and the waste of capital, Ortega conflates the action of creating sculpture with an economics of positive and negative spaces. In this case, the economic structure is contingent with form and the process of creating sculpture. His use of bricks allow for further pockets of space within the sculpture recalling both the regular geometry of modernist urban planning, but also to osseous tissue like bone which is composed around tiny spaces. In another series of sculpture, Ortega casts ventilation hoses to appear as post-industrial fossils. These coiled works recall both urban detritus but also the organic coils of insects and worms. In both series of sculptures, Pre-Columbian antecedents mix within the modernist/industrial aesthetics and quasi-organic forms to reconsider the varied anthropological, artistic, and political strains that create urban environments. Damián Ortega was born in 1967 in Mexico and currently lives and works in Berlin. He has had solo exhibitions at various international venues such as the Museum of Contemporary Art, Los Angeles; Tate Modern, London; Museu da Arte Pampulha, Belo Horizonte, Brazil; Kunsthalle Basel; and Institute of Contemporary Art, Philadelphia; Centre Pompidou, Paris. He has been included in various prominent group exhibitions including the 2003 Venice Biennale, the 4th Berlin Biennial, and the 2006 Sao Paulo Biennial. This fall his work will be the subject of a retrospective at the Institute of Contemporary Art, Boston, which will be accompanied by a catalogue published in coordination with Rizzoli.

We are pleased to announce an exhibition of new paintings by Magnus Plessen. Plessen constructs his compositions through defined brushstrokes, deliberate scrapes of paint, and a charged juxtaposition of positive and negative space. The imagery—landscapes, female figures, even soda bottles—that emerges from the lines, spaces, and colors seems both haphazardly collaged together and carefully installed, as if Plessen conjured the subject unconsciously through the act of painting. In this new body of work, he strives to create work in which perspective and point of view do not remain fixed. Plessen's continual spatial volley, as rendered through line and shape, not only destabilizes the figure/ground relationship but also dislocates the compulsion for narration. In the painting Spiel (Game), two disembodied figures tease the etymological overlap between playing a hand of cards and gambling with body parts. Any attempt to resuscitate the scene through ekphrasis begins and ends with the pile of seemingly collaged hands floating on the surface of the canvas. The enigmatic subject matter works in tandem with Plessen's method to examine what the artist calls "the process of 'unfinishing' a painting." It is within this liminal region that the viewer's point of view can manifest in a multiplicity of vantages. For Plessen, vision becomes a form of touching, a method of discerning the world not through passive observation alone, but through interrelation. Through his paintings, Plessen insists upon a world whose visual order must be read as both fluid and tactile, in which vision is continually reconstructed through both eyes and hands. Magnus Plessen was born in 1967 in Hamburg, Germany. His paintings have been the subject of numerous solo exhibitions, at various venues including the Neues Kunstmuseum in Luzern, K21 Kunstsammlung Nordrhein-Westfalen in Düsseldorf, P.S. 1 in New York, the Centre Pompidou in Paris, and the Art Institute of Chicago. His work was also included in the fiftieth Venice Biennale in 2003. This fall Dumont will publish Die Augen en der Hand (The Eyes in my Hand) a new monograph of his complete paintings.

We are pleased to announce an exhibition of new work by artist Shirin Neshat, her first presentation in our gallery in Brussels. Neshat's photographs and films synthesize the complex intellection surrounding the global construction of identity, as channeled through differences of gender, race, religion, and culture. In her early series of work, Women of Allah in which Farsi calligraphy mingled with politically bold imagery, Neshat has honed the craft of marrying striking visuals with thoughtful cultural critique. In Games of Desire, her new body of work, Neshat continues using multi-channel film installation and photography to elaborate upon the ritual structures that define identity. While still questioning binaries such as man and woman or East and West, this new project situates itself in Laos eschewing the visual vocabulary of the Middle East. A two-channel projection explores the tradition of the lam, a Laotian custom of reciting courtship songs. In this fading tradition, now almost exclusively enacted by the elderly men and women who are its only torch-bearers, a man and a woman will sing-address each other, pitching woo until this exuberant brinksmanship of desire becomes a witty repartée of bawdy and charming improvisations. For this film, Neshat shows the men and women on separate channels facing each other so that the viewer becomes entangled in the joyous back and forth. She also captures the crowds of men and women who witness and encourage the performers. As the artist states, "Men and especially women seem to relish this opportunity to playfully transgress the strict codes that define gender roles and regulate sexual expression in their everyday lives." Along with the film, Neshat will present photographic portraits of the men and women embellished with the Farsi translations of the lam, linking the cultural traditions and political histories of Laos and Iran. Shirin Neshat was born in Qazvin, Iran, and moved to the United States in 1974. She has been the subject of solo exhibitions at numerous museums, including Museo de Arte Moderno, Mexico City; Contemporary Arts Museum, Houston; Walker Art Center, Minneapolis; Espoo Museum of Modern Art, Finland; Castello di Rivoli, Turin; Dallas Museum of Art; Wexner Center, Columbus; the Art Institute of Chicago; the Serpentine Gallery, London; Museo de Arte Contemporaneo in Leon, Spain; and the Hamburger Bahnhof, Berlin. Shirin has been included in Documenta XI, the 1999 Venice Biennale, and the 2000 Whitney Biennial. She was awarded the First International Award at 48th Venice Biennale, the Hiroshima Freedom Prize, and the Lillian Gish Prize. In 2008, her solo exhibition "Women Without Men" opened at the ARoS Kunstmuseum, Denmark; traveled to the National Gallery of Contemporary Art in Athens and it will open at the Kulturhuset Stockholm in the fall. She currently lives and works in New York. A fully illustrated artist's book will accompany this exhibition.

We are pleased to announce an exhibition by American graphic artist and cartoonist Basil Wolverton curated by Cameron Jamie. Basil Wolverton submitted his first cartoon for publication in 1925 when he was only sixteen and remained an active cartoonist from the 1940s through to the 1970s. His unique and humorously grotesque drawings reveal both his fantastic wit and inventive technique, once famously described in LIFE Magazine as the "spaghetti and meatball school of design." Wolverton had no formal training as an artist, creating his own style that distinguished him from the other cartoonists of his generation. As he said, "I know I draw things that look like all kinds of organs and glands, it is like the monkey which, if he pounded away for a million years, might accidentally type out the 'Star Spangled Banner' lyrics." Generations of artists including Peter Saul, Ed Ruscha, Robert Williams, Jim Shaw, Mike Kelley, and Cameron Jamie have been influenced by his meticulous technique and pictorial freedom, in addition to its undeniable impact on numerous cartoonists from R. Crumb to Drew Friedman. This exhibition includes a wide spectrum of Wolverton's work from his earliest drawings published in numerous comic books, including "Spacehawk" and "Powerhouse Pepper," to his very detailed caricatures, with sculpted and exaggerated features. Perhaps the most famous body of work in the exhibition are his drawings for Harvey Kurtzman's comic-book version of MAD Magazine from the 1950s. Also included are portraits made for Topps Chewing Gum in the 1960s, which appeared on bubble gum posters and stickers. Wolverton turned to illustrating Biblical themes and events in his later years, represented here by thirteen drawings from the Apocalypse series based on the Book of Revelation. These drawings are regarded among his finest and many of these illustrations were reproduced in Plain Truth magazine. Born in 1909 in Central Point, Oregon, Basil Wolverton resided for most of his life in the Pacific Northwest until his death in 1978. His work has been published in a variety of magazines and comic books, from MAD Magazine, America's Humor Magazine, The Portland News, Plop! and Hollywood Today. His work has been featured in Timely Comics, Circus Comics and Target Comics. He also contributed to the Li'l Abner Comic Strip and LIFE Magazine. In 2006, his work was exhibited at The Portland Art Center in Oregon and in 2007 the CSUF Grand Art Center in Santa Ana, California presented a solo exhibition of Wolverton's oeuvre from the collection of Glenn Bray. The works selected and presented in this exhibition are also from Bray's private archive/collection.

We are pleased to announce an exhibition of new work by Dave Muller. In his installations of paintings on paper, Muller explores his ongoing relationship with the past, present, and future of music, using record collections, musical taxonomies, and set-lists as impetus for portraits and cultural critiques. With a connoisseur's eye, he dissects and juxtaposes this graphic cultural residue with imagery of flora and fauna creating a conversation between natural topography and his musical interests. Charting the construction of identity through these acquired cultural productions, Muller investigates the overlaps and subtle consonance that artistic taste creates between the individual and the group. In this manner a varied and elaborate self-portrait emerges from the graphics he culls from the world around him and reproduces from his own perspective. Moving from the specificity of an expert to the ubiquity of the commonplace, the images in Muller's installation expand and envelop the viewer into their field creating a communal portrait based upon the roving markers of tastes throughout periods and geographies. As Muller said in an interview for his recent retrospective at MUSAC, "I want my art to be as useful to me as a good piece of music, to take me somewhere new, to make me think and also make me happy." This sense of jubilation is apparent in his installations, even as he probes deeper connections and sophisticated cultural investigations. And all are welcome to this holiday. Dave Muller was born in 1964 in San Francisco. In 2002, his exhibition "Connections" premiered at the Bard Center for Curatorial Studies in Annandale-on-Hudson, NY, and traveled to the Hammer Museum in Los Angeles. He has had numerous exhibitions in the United States and abroad, including solo shows at the San Francisco Museum of Modern Art, the ICA, Boston, and the St. Louis Art Museum, while he has been included in the 2004 Whitney Biennial and the 2003 and 2005 Lyon Biennials. Most recently, Muller has a mid-career survey called "I Like Your Music, I Love Your Music" at the Museo de Arte Contemporanea de Castilla y Leon in Lyon, Spain. He currently lives and works in Los Angeles.

We are pleased to announce the first solo exhibition in New York of Romanian artist Victor Man. Branching across media, Man's paintings, sculptures and installations are steeped in a sense of mysticism both beguiling and confusing. He appropriates found images and renders them in sooty tones, as if conjured out of the ash of their original context. In doing so, Man evacuates complete meaning and replaces it with a tenebrous omission that creates a subjective discourse in lieu of narrative foreclosure. This deconstructed creation of signification imparts a sense of both desire and trauma, seducing and violating any attempt at exegesis. Man's resistance to facile interpretation extends beyond the haunting poetry of his paintings and into his dynamic interplay of space and object. His sculptures and installations seem to haunt each other rather than present a linear logic, as their disparate materials each contribute a history of its own depleted context. As Tom Morton says in his essay accompanying his exhibition at GAMEC, Bergamo: "Instead—through the conduit of a shared material, or a common emotional pitch, or even the whispered echo of a form—meaning flames back and forth across their constituent parts, flaring and guttering, and always threatening to burn itself out." In burying the narrative impulse, Man raises the uncanny threats of storytelling, reminding the viewer that he must ultimately confront the story he forces himself to tell. Man's images and objects remain knowingly mute, eliciting desire even while policing their own secretive historiographies. Victor Man was born in 1974 and lives and works in Cluj-Napoca, Romania. He has been the subject of a number of solo exhibitions at museums world wide including GAMEC, Bergamo, Italy, and Ikon Gallery, Birmingham, England. He has simultaneous exhibitions currently on view at CIAP in Île-de-Vassivière, France, and Museum Boijmans van Beuningen, Rotterdam. Man has also been included in a number of group exhibitions including "Whose (His)story," Kunstverein in Hamburg; "Back to Black," Kestner Gesellschaft Hannover, Germany; "Art Focus 5," International Biennial of Contemporary Art, Jerusalem; and "Reframing," CCA, Andratx/Mallorca, Spain. His work was also exhibited in the Romanian Pavilion at Venice Biennale 52 in 2007, the 2nd Prague Biennial, and the 2008 Busan Biennial. This October, Victor Man will have a solo exhibition at the Hayward Gallery, London.

We are pleased to announce a new large-scale installation by Huang Yong Ping. A founding member of the Xiamen Dada group in China during the mid-1980s, Huang Yong Ping has garnered an international reputation as an avant-garde provocateur. Exploring both formal and conceptual practices from Eastern and Western art history, Huang Yong Ping incorporates various media to develop a conceptual program utilizing the power of art to instigate reform. Redefining the notion of hybridization, Huang Yong Ping conflates the symbols of Eastern and Western art historical traditions and political events to explore the intersection of individual experience and broader manifestations of culture. For this exhibition, Huang Yong Ping will create a monumental installation comprised of a single temple-like construction. Taking its form from the spiral of a coiled snake skeleton, a ramp of bamboo gradually rises taking the viewers from the tail toward its head. In transforming the rib cage of the snake into a series of arches, Huang Yong Ping echoes the architecture of a Gothic cathedral, simultaneously reworking this Western style with Eastern materials and subtly transforming the cruciform symbol of Christian salvation into the tangled figure of Edenic temptation. More importantly, this Tower of Babel-like sculpture depends upon the natural material of bamboo reaffirming its link to Eastern construction. Huang Yong Ping subverts well-worn cultural symbols to create seemingly disparate juxtapositions that unfold into nuanced takes on history, national identity, and artistic practice Born in 1954, Huang Yong Ping participated in the seminal exhibition "Magiciens de la Terre" at Centre Georges Pompidou, Paris in 1989, and represented France at the 1999 Venice Biennale. In 2006, the Walker Art Center in Minneapolis organized and premiered his retrospective "House of Oracles," which traveled to Mass MoCA in North Adams, Massachusetts; Vancouver Art Gallery; and Ullens Center, Beijing. Other solo exhibitions include: CCA Kitakyushu, Japan; De Appel, Amsterdam; Fondation Cartier pour l'Art Contemporain, Paris; Atelier d'Artistes de la Ville de Marseille; Astrup Fearnley Museum, Oslo; Barbican Art Gallery, London; and New Museum of Contemporary Art, New York.

We are pleased to announce an exhibition of new work by Polish artist Miroslaw Balka. Having witnessed the aftermath of the Holocaust in his native county, Balka's sculpture contemplates history's intersection with memory and the human body. Combining a minimal rigor with poetic grace, his work memorializes events through symbolic abstraction rather than discrete monument. Balka's craft, imbued with a familial lineage, relies upon the well-worn objects of human use and the traces left by the body, such as the salt from tears and sweat, evoking the burdened emotions that lie beyond the easily parsed dates and facts of the past. This exhibition combines sculpture and video projection in which commonplace events and materials become powerful emblems of historical significance. The title refers to acupuncture's method of incisive interventions for therapeutic means: moments of pain bring forth healing. In a new video projection, Balka uses his own belt to whip the gallery floor. Showing the work on a bed of salt, he transfers the pain of flagellation onto an abstraction of the human body. In another work, Balka films the smoke from a diesel engine as a driver pushes the gas to the rhythm of a Polish lullaby. The lulling tones, however only produce more smoke and cannot fully soothe the pain inflicted onto the body. These spare structures and abstracted videos, like acupuncture, necessitate healing though not complete physical or psychological solace. Miroslaw Balka was born in 1958 outside Warsaw, where he continues to live and work. He has been the subject of many one-person exhibitions at international venues, including the Irish Museum of Modern Art, Dublin; K21, Dusseldorf, Germany; National Museum of Art, Osaka; Museet for Samtidskunst, Oslo; IVAM, Centre Del Carme, Valencia; Tate Gallery, London; Van Abbemuseum, Eindhoven; Museum Haus Lange, Krefeld; and Renaissance Society at the University of Chicago. He has been included in the 2007 SITE Santa Fe Biennial and the Venice Biennales of 2005, 2003, and 1993 where he represented Poland. His video projections are currently the subject of an exhibition at the University Gallery at the University of Massachusetts, Amherst. Balka's commission for the Tate's Turbine Hall will open in October.

We are pleased to announce an exhibition of new drawings by Matthew Barney from Ancient Evenings, a seven act opera loosely based on Norman Mailer's 1983 Egyptian-set novel and currently in development by Barney and composer Jonathan Bepler. Each act of the opera chronicles one of the seven stages that the soul passes through after the death of the body. Remaining true to the original theme of rebirth and reincarnation, Ancient Evenings recasts the central myth of Isis and Osiris in a contemporary industrial landscape. Barney has replaced the human body with the body of the 1967 Chrysler Imperial that was the central motif from his earlier film Cremaster 3. This exhibition will include drawings that explore the character and thematic development of the first two acts, entitled "Ren" and "Sekhem." Obsessively drawn, Barney's graphite drawings map the conceptual depths of each project rather than presenting storyboard-like narratives. Barney evokes his beautifully rendered imagery with the addition of non-traditional materials such as petroleum jelly and metal leaf, in addition to lapis dust and PCL, a plastic derived from crude oil. Alongside these drawings, Barney has taken seven copies of Mailer's novel to create unique sculptures inside wall-mounted vitrines. Each piece contains one copy resting upon a bed of carved salt and opened to a spread that bears a drawing pertaining to one of the seven stages of the soul. In co-mingling Barney's draftsmanship with passages that comprise the opera's libretto, each book represents a different aspect of Barney's new interpretation of Mailer's novel. Matthew Barney was born in 1967 and studied art at Yale University. He has received numerous awards including the Aperto prize at the 1993 Venice Biennale; the 1996 Hugo Boss Award; and the 2007 Kaiser Ring Award. He has been included in group exhibitions worldwide such as Documenta IX in Kassel, Germany; the Whitney Biennials of 1993 and 1995; and the groundbreaking "Post-Human" exhibition in 1992. His solo exhibition "The Cremaster Cycle," organized by the Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, New York, traveled to the Museum Ludwig, Cologne, and the Musée d'Art Moderne de la Ville de Paris. The large-scale exhibition of the entire "Drawing Restraint" series was organized by the 21st Century Museum for Contemporary Art, Kanazawa, and traveled to Leeum, Samsung Museum of Art, Seoul; San Francisco Museum of Modern Art; Serpentine Gallery, London; and Kunsthalle Vienna. A retrospective of the Cremaster and Drawing Restraint videos was presented by the Fondazione Merz, Torino, in 2008. Act 1 of Ancient Evenings, "Ren," was performed in Los Angeles in May 2008. Acts 2 - 4 are currently in production for summer 2009.

We are pleased to announce its first exhibition with New York-based British artist Andrew Lord. From his earliest exhibitions in the late seventies and early eighties, Lord has used clay as a medium of fine art to explore various subjects. While these subjects are as varied as silhouettes of artists and writers traced by the outer contours of a vase or pendent fragments modeled from his own body, Lord's work grasps sensation as physical form. He translates the action of the senses—hearing, seeing, tasting, feeling—from their liminal states into objects, both tactile and visual. In this new body of work, Andrew Lord approaches memory as a sense itself, creating sculpture in clay and plaster based on landmarks from Whitworth, England, where he grew up. Just as he used his own body as an implement to show the physicality of sensation, he treats the act of remembering as a capacity with corporeal potential. He said that "making this work has been a process of finding lost places"; and in reviving genius loci through his own hand, Lord has created a sculptural map of the town, navigating a personal history through the locatable and recognizable features of Whitworth's geography. In addition to sculpture, this exhibition marks Lord's first exploration of film, having created a video work based on a recent visit back to Whitworth. While the juxtaposition of the film may initially seem like a corrective to the more subjective sculptural survey, neither represents a standardized view; rather, both incorporate the aura of the artist's own memory, discovery and desire for the past. Andrew Lord was born in 1950 in Whitworth, England, and lives and works in New York. His work has been the subject of numerous solo exhibitions at international institutions including Art & Project, Amsterdam; The Carnegie Museum of Art in Pittsburgh, PA; Camden Arts Center, London; and Rijksmuseum Twenthe, Enschede. He has also been included in group exhibitions including "Atelier 15," Stedelijk Museum, Amsterdam; "Westkunst-Heute," Museen dr Stadt, Köln; "Anderer Leute Kunst," Museum Haus Lange, Krefeld; 1995 Whitney Biennial; "Site and Insight" PS1, New York; "The Third Mind," Palais de Tokyo.

We are pleased to announce a new work by Thomas Hirschhorn. Known for sprawling works that transform traditional white cube spaces into absorbing environments tackling issues of critical theory, global politics, and consumerism, Hirschhorn engages the viewer through superabundance. Combining found imagery and texts, bound up in low-tech constructions of cardboard, foil, and packing tape, he props imagistic assaults in a DIY-fashion that correlates to the intellectual scavenging and sensory overload designed to simulate our own process of grappling with the excess of information in daily life. For this exhibition, Hirschhorn will convert the gallery space into a universal gym, recasting fitness equipment and anatomical models into an apparatus of social critique. While classical in origin, the gymnasium has become a quasi-pedagogical space for modern man and a primary site of interaction, though whether the action of the gym is social or merely narcissistic becomes the pivot upon which Hirschhorn makes his case. The construction of one's self as human, in his or her physical fitness, determines communal notions of desire and longevity, and yet the preponderance of physical expenditure and surplus, of discipline and logic, foreshortens perspective to the point where maintaining standardized positions precludes critical inquiry. As the artist writes of the work, "Universal Gym is a space for exhaustion, for hanging on, for staying upright, and staying in shape while the world falls apart." In many ways the Universal Gym becomes somewhat comic, a ship of perfected fools sailing blindly through the storm. Thomas Hirschhorn was born in 1957 in Bern, Switzerland, and now lives and works in Paris. His work has been the subject of numerous solo exhibitions including the Institute of Contemporary Art, Boston; Centre Georges Pompidou, Paris; Museu d'Art Contemporani, Barcelona; Kunsthaus Zürich; Art Institute of Chicago; and Museum Ludwig, Cologne; and Secession, Vienna. In 2003 he founded the Musée Précaire Albinet, a temporary art and community space in Aubervilliers, France. Additionally, he has taken part in many international group exhibitions, including Documenta 11 in Kassel, Germany, where his large-scale public work, Bataille Monument, was on view; "Heart of Darkness" at the Walker Art Center; and recently "Life on Mars: the 55th Carnegie International." Hirschhorn was the recipient of the Prix Marcel Duchamp in 2000 and the Joseph Beuys-Preis in 2004.

We are pleased to announce an exhibition of works by American photographer Roe Ethridge. Combining the pre-fabricated slickness of stock photography with a trenchant conceptual view of its construction, Ethridge queries the fault lines between creating imagery and capturing the world. As Kate Bush said in the pages of Artforum, "As technically adept as a commercial photographer yet as thoughtful as a Conceptualist about photography's role and meaning in the modern world, Ethridge believes the ubiquity of the photograph and the instantaneity of its transmission and reception in this age of increasing 'ecstatic communication' is to be embraced rather than mourned." For this exhibition, Ethridge has returned to a studio-based approach after the international location shooting for his last project "Rockaway." Whether composing landscapes from his Brooklyn window or working with models, Ethridge's measured conceptualism blurs the editorial aspects of each shot with the specificity of his own photographic practice: Obstructions on the window of his studio ground the almost postcard-perfect shots with the specificity of his view, while models lean on tripods labeled with the location of the shoot never allowing consumer thrall to overshadow his composition. In this manner, Ethridge purposefully weaves the haphazardness of everyday life into each photograph, reminding the viewer of the slippage between the fantasy of imagery and the reality of its construction. Born in 1969 in Miami, Florida. Roe Ethridge studied photography in Atlanta, Georgia before leaving the southern states to work in New York. His photographs have appeared in numerous group exhibitions, including "Photographers on Photography" at the Metropolitan Museum of Art; 2008 Whitney Biennial; "The Americans," The Barbican Center, London; Greater New York, Museum of Modern Art/P.S. 1, 2000. In 2005 the Institute of Contemporary Art, Boston, mounted a solo presentation of his work.

We are pleased to announce its first exhibition with artists Jennifer Allora and Guillermo Calzadilla. Since 1995, Allora & Calzadilla have developed a complex artistic vocabulary utilizing films, installations, performances, and sculpture. Their artistic practice engages with history and contemporary geo-political realities, exposing their complicated dynamics, destabilizing and re-ordering them in ways that can be alternately humorous, poetic, and revelatory. For this exhibition, they will present Stop, Repair, Prepare: Variations on Ode to Joy for a Prepared Piano, which was originally exhibited at Haus der Kunst, Munich in 2008. Blending sculpture and performance, Allora & Calzadilla have carved a hole in the center of an early 20th-century Bechstein piano, creating a void through which the performer stands to play the Fourth Movement of Beethoven's Ninth Symphony. Commonly known as the "Ode to Joy," this famous final chorus has long been invoked as a musical representation of human fraternity and universal brotherhood in contexts as ideologically disparate as the Chinese Cultural Revolution, Ian Smith's White Supremacist Rhodesia, and the Third Reich among many others. Today it is the official anthem of the European Union. Expanding the notions of both a prepared-piano and a player piano, the performer must reach over the keyboard and resituate his/her fingering of the keys both upside down and backwards while at times physically mobilizing the instrument to trace a path through the gallery. This structurally incomplete version of the ode (the hole in the piano renders two full octaves inoperative) creates variations on the corporeal as well as sonic dimension of the player/instrument dynamic, the signature melody being played, and its pre-established connotations. With Stop, Repair, Prepare, Allora & Calzadilla explore the fluid and organic relationships inherent in music, exposing the varied dynamics between composition and meaning, instrument and performance, while tracking the political and artistic sentiments involved in music's history. Throughout the exhibition, there will be hourly performances on Tuesday through Saturday by the following pianists: Amir Khosrowpour, Kathy Tagg, Mia Elezovic, Sun Jun, Terezija Cukrov, Walter Aparicio. Jennifer Allora (born 1974, USA) and Guillermo Calzadilla (born 1971, Cuba) have been collaborating since 1995. They have been the subject of numerous solo exhibitions around the world, including presentations at Haus der Kunst and Kunstverein München; Stedelijk Museum, Amsterdam; San Francisco Art Institute; Whitechapel Art Gallery and the Serpentine Gallery, London; Kunsthalle Zurich; The Renaissance Society, Chicago; and Palais de Tokyo, Paris. They have also been included in group exhibitions such as "Prospect 1 New Orleans," 2008; the 8th & 9th Lyon Biennales, 2005/2007; 2006 Whitney Biennial; 2005 Venice Biennale; "How Latitudes Become Form," Walker Arts Center, Minneapolis, 2003, and "Common Wealth," Tate Modern, 2003. Allora & Calzadilla are based in San Juan, Puerto Rico and are presently DAAD scholarship holders in Berlin, Germany.

We are pleased to announce an exhibition of works by the Italian artist Fausto Melotti. A consistent thread runs through his sculptures, drawings and ceramics in which discrete objects become both infinite and immaterial. The ceramic Teatrini of the1940s emerged from poetic sketches, which in turn evolved from earlier sculpture. In 1959 Melotti finally abandoned ceramics and turned to brass and metal wire, giving way to a new formal language. A great lover of music, Melotti valued it above all other forms of art, which accounts for the unique rhythm in his work. Juxtaposing plaster, brass, chains and cloth, Melotti creates a new universe at times solid, yet ephemeral. The geometric construction of the Teatrini reference Mondrian's horizontal and vertical structures and blocks of color. However, for Melotti these spaces house faint figures and objects in theatrical tableaux creating a world where abstract thought and lyric figuration intertwine. As the artist said: "With the Teatrini I did not abandon the rigorous idea of counterpoint, but rather wanted to create something that was at once figurative while situating it in an abstract and metaphysical milieu." Born in Rovereto to a musical family, Fausto Melotti (1901-1986) began studying music, mathematics and physics before enrolling at the prestigious Accademia di Belle Arti di Brera in Milan where he befriended fellow artist Lucio Fontana. His first exhibition was at the Galleria del Milione in Milan in 1935. The Museum am Ostwall Dortmund held the first retrospective of his work in 1971. He exhibited in both Italy and abroad up until his death. The1986 Venice Biennale opened with a major exhibition of Melotti's work, earning him a posthumous Leone d'Oro.

We are pleased to announce an exhibition of new work by German artist Paloma Varga Weisz. Her sculptures and works on paper skirt the issues of history and influence, melting and mixing sources, periods, and figments into an indistinct pool of images. In taming what she calls "the rapid pictures that arise in one's head," Varga Weisz tends to the metamorphosis of the images that move from mind to hand, from watercolor to wood, producing hybrids that recall at once history, folklore, contemporary media, and works of art. As Guido de Werd noted in his catalogue to her exhibition at the Kurhaus Kleve, the charmingly surreal figures that populate her work seem "like pictures belonging to an unknown fairytale." In this manner, Varga Weisz sculpts an uncharted terrain, tracing the border of the familiar and the remarkable. In this new body of work, she continues her investigation into the Gilded Age, a period of American history in which the extravagant lifestyle of robber barons stood in stark contrast to the poor whose energies and craft fed the booming industries. In contrasting tableaux, be-wigged and lidded metal-leafed sculptures stand apart from a pair of life-size figures woven from basket reeds. Seeming to align materials with industry and opulence, handicraft and leisure, Varga Weisz weaves allegory and critique into her quasi-historical recreations. Embracing barrels or basketry to create or house her figures, Varga Weisz breathes new life into these practical objects. The imaginative figures that emerge from these humble origins persist even in the face of growing industrialization, proving the long and continuing life of these craft traditions. Transcending pastiche, her installations do not find root in their source-material alone, but rather gain their meaning through their transformation of form, their evolution from the homely to the fantastic. Just as she creates imaginative interventions with the world that surrounds her and its history, Varga Wiesz's mis-en-scene become less a presentation of fact and more of a tale she weaves. Paloma Varga Weisz was born in 1966 and raised in Neustadt an der Weinstrasse, Germany. After studying at the Kunstacademie Düsseldorf, she has continued to live and work there. She had a solo exhibition at the Museum Kurhaus Kleve and has been included in numerous group exhibitions at the Hamburger Bahnhof, Berlin, and the Kunstverein Düsseldorf, as well as in the permanent collection of K21. She was included in the 2005 Venice Biennale as a part of Rosa Martinez's exhibition "Always a Little Further," and "Of Mice and Men," the 2006 Berlin Biennial. Earlier this year, the Kunsthalle Wein mounted an exhibition of her recent work.

We are pleased to announce an exhibition of new paintings by Los Angeles-based artist Lari Pittman. Known for densely worked compositions that marry bold graphic design with historical modes of figuration, his distinctive mix of cultural signs range from the social to the domestic. In a completely unique style, Pittman re-imagines everyday life in a divergent range of styles, and yet the multifaceted nature of both his formal style and selection of imagery remain intensely personal, even as they pull from the realms of politics, philosophy, and design. In his new body of work, Pittman explores the tradition of vanitas painting, which came to fruition in Northern Europe, particularly the Dutch and Flemish regions, in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. Taken from the Latin meaning emptiness, these still life paintings usually incorporated skulls, burning candles, cut flowers and other objects that mark the passage of time and the transience of life. Pittman structures his modern-day nature morte around diaphanous bubbles, frying eggs, vegetables, splashing kettles, and strings of light bulbs. His day-glo cornucopias, equally warm portraits of domestic life, take on a more thoughtful aspect when seen as arrangements made for a fleeting life. Pittman's painting techniques eschew the somber tones and realistic volumes of his Dutch and Flemish predecessors. These new paintings have an almost batik-like tone, as if dyes have stained the surface or stamps have printed a pattern onto the surface of the painting. Reached through layers of paint bleeding through more translucent applications on the surface, the very structure of the painting itself, the hues and consistencies of the paint, become as transient as his imagery. In exposing the pentimenti, he allows the early life of the painting to rise to the surface, marking the passage of time and space. Pittman's flares of color and exuberant patterns imbue these still lifes with a sense of saudade, a hopeful sense of nostalgia for the return of what has gone. Born in 1952 in Glendale, California, Lari Pittman has been awarded the J. Paul Getty Trust Fund for the Visual Arts Fellowship Grant in Painting, NEA Fellowship Grants in Painting and the Skowhegan Medal for Painting. His recent solo exhibitions include: ICA, London; Centre d'Art Contemporain, Geneva; Los Angeles County Museum of Art; Corcoran Museum, Washington DC; Contemporary Arts Museum, Houston; Villa Arson, Nice. Pittman lives and works in Los Angeles where he is a professor of art at UCLA.

We are pleased to inaugurate its new location in Brussels with a group show curated by Francesco Bonami, "No Information Available." In his 1970 breakthrough exhibition "Information" at the Museum of Modern Art, Kynaston McShine helped define the new realm of conceptual art. In the thirty-eight years since, increasing access and continual bombarding of information has radically transformed the world, and with it conceptual vocabularies of art have come full circle. Artists Included: Tauba Auerbach Isa Genzken Fernanda Gomes Sergej Jensen Ian Kiaer Hugo Markl Mitzi Pederson Bojan Sarcevic Scott Short Rudolf Stingel Rosemarie Trockel Franz West Jordan Wolfson "No Information Available" is both a tribute to McShine's exhibition and a reflection of how we live now, an age where the excess of information has produced a jaded reality. While in a European Old Master painting the surface of the canvas is completely filled with the facts of reality, a Japanese woodcut field has the space to imagine a new lived experience. The works in this exhibition would thrive in that interstice. The artists in the show give the viewer a renewed opportunity for interpretation, proposing a world of invisible clues opposed to the given facts of the information age. In its place is that kind of silence welcomed by John Cage: silence as a space open to minimal and transformative intervention. Intuition and memory replace fact and figuration to open up a new reality: a small utopian attempt to return to a blank slate and discover what art would be without what is already known. Francesco Bonami has curated numerous exhibitions worldwide. His most recent exhibitions are the Jeff Koons retrospective currently on view at the Museum of Contemporary Art, Chicago and "Italics: Italian Art Between Tradition and Revolution 1968-2008" that will open at Palazzo Grassi, Venice on September 27 and will travel to the MCA Chicago in 2009.

We are pleased to announce an exhibition of historic work by Mario Merz. A major figure in the Arte Povera movement of the 1960s and 70s, Merz's use of both organic and industrial materials was at the forefront of the movement's artistic identity. Roughly translated as "poor art," Merz along with counterparts such as Alighiero e Boetti and Luciano Fabro wanted to separate the art object from consumer capital, emphasizing conceptual process and everyday forms as the most transcendent methods of universal communication. Best known for his igloos and neon Fibonacci sequences, Mario Merz's shamanistic installations become spaces both primal and technological, where the scientific basis of organic life confronts the roaming imagination of man. The igloo began appearing in Merz's work in 1967 and continued throughout his life. He saw the mobility of this typical shelter for nomadic wandering as an ideal metaphor for the space of the artist. Delineating interior and exterior, the igloo allows the artist domain anywhere, and for any time, along the spectrum of human existence. In this exhibition, the gallery will show two igloos that incorporate Merz's signature use of metal, neon lights, and animal forms. Often bringing together disparate ideas or forms, the igloos straddle dichotomies: as Merz said: "I work with contradiction – neon and canvas, glass and wax, electrical technology and mud. Everything is a contradiction because without that there is no life." In addition to the igloo, Merz was fascinated by the Fibonacci sequence, the mathematical pattern (named for the Italian monk who discovered it) that reveals the growth rate of many organic materials (the nautilus shell, leaves, pinecones, antlers, etc.). The pattern is identifiable as a sequence of numbers in which any given number is the sum of the two numbers that precede it: 1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, etc., ad infinitum. Fashioned in neon and draped along walls, often punctuating the hemispheres of his igloos or marking the facades of buildings, Merz's use of the Fibonacci sequence speaks to the artist's strong belief in the potentiality of growth and the ability to transform through eternity. His belief in the omnipresent domain of the human experience, its continuing power to grow, and his transformation of waste into the conduits of his concepts speaks directly to his empathic embrace of life. Mario Merz was born in 1925 and died in 2003. He was awarded the Ambrogino Gold Prize, Milan; the Oskar Kokoschka Prize, Vienna; and the Arnold Bode Prize, Kassel. He was the subject of numerous solo exhibitions at institutions around the world, including Fundação de Serralves, Porto; Welhelm Lehmbruck Museum, Duisberg; Fundación Antoni Tàpies, Barcelona; Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, New York. His work is currently on view as part of "Life on Mars: 55th Carnegie International" in Pittsburgh, PA. The Fondazione Merz in Turin, Itlay, regularly displays both the works of its namesake and sponsors exhibitions by living artists.

We are pleased to announce an exhibition of new work by artist Jean-Luc Mylayne. Blurring the boundary between artist and subject, Mylayne's large format color photographs belie the patience and singular focus of his explorations into art. This powerful new body of work represents the artist's first series of photographs made in America. Shot during a two year Lannan Foundation residency in Bernal, New Mexico, and Fort Davis, Texas, here Mylayne continues his ongoing project of photographing birds in their natural environs. As opposed to seeking out the most exotic specimens of winged life, he rather pursues harmony between the commonplace and the extraordinary and a balance between the landscape and the birds that call it home. Each unique photograph condenses the patience of the artist, who will often wait for weeks or months to build a trusting relationship with his avian subjects. Yet, it is not simply the case of snapping the shutter in the decisive moment; rather, Mylayne uses a series of lenses unique to his practice that reconfigure the landscape, appearing simultaneously in focus or blurred, to mimic neither spatial perspective nor the artist's point of view, but the naked eye itself. Whether hidden within bushes, blurred in motion, or seeming to perch on the edge of the lens itself, the birds that Mylayne photographs appear to relate equally to their context as well as their role in front of the camera. As the artist says: "The bird didn't just consent to a picture. He posed, allowing me to take this portrait. It took two years to achieve this result. And it isn't just about understanding the life of birds. Above all, it is an exploration, a way to try and to know ourselves, what we do and why we do it, through the bird." Mylayne is no naturalist, a bird-watcher driven to examine the scientific traits of a species; instead, his nomadic project is one of personal understanding and the relationships that are essential, yet not exclusive to, humanity. Jean-Luc Mylayne was born in 1946 and lives in France. One-person exhibitions include the Photographers' Gallery, London; the ARC/Musée d'Art Moderne de la Ville de Paris; the Musée d'Art Moderne, St. Etienne; the Bibliotèque Nationale, Paris; and the Musée des Beaux-Arts, Calais. This past year an exhibition of his work organized by the Blaffer Gallery at the University of Houston traveled to the Henry Art Gallery in Seattle and the Museum of Contemporary Art Cleveland; the exhibition will travel on to the Krannert Art Museum at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign and the Parish Art Museum in Southampton, New York. Mylayne has been the recipient of a Lannan Foundation Grant. In 2007 Twin Palms published a comprehensive monograph spanning his more-than-thirty year career.

Enslaved to everything, By being too sensitive I have wasted my life --Arthur Rimbaud, "Song of the Highest Tower," 1872 We are pleased to announce "Idle Youth," an exhibition curated by Russell Ferguson. Including the work of an eclectic group of fifteen artists of different generations, the exhibition is organized around overlapping themes of aspiration, sensitivity, and frustration. Rimbaud was only seventeen when he wrote "Song of the Highest Tower," but already he was half-convinced that it was all too late. He gave up poetry at twenty, became a trader of coffee and guns in Ethiopia, and was dead at thirty-seven. His myth, though, lives on, constantly approaching cliché yet appealing to each new generation eager to follow his path of a "derangement of all the senses." The work in the exhibition has been chosen less in response to the derangement of the senses than to the desire to achieve that transcendence of an often-dismal everyday life. The artists whose work is included are: Roy Arden Mike Disfarmer Mari Eastman Thomas Eggerer Kirsten Everberg Paul Graham Rodney Graham Jonathan Hernández Larry Johnson Nathan Mabry Catherine Opie Michael Queenland George Shaw Kerry Tribe Martin Wong The work ranges from Disfarmer's haunting mid-century Arkansas portraits to Arden's found-footage video of Canadian hockey fans rioting; from Shaw's paintings of a boarded-up youth club to Everberg's of a shiny and empty coffee shop. Rock music myths are evoked by Rodney Graham's Black Sabbath homage and by Johnson's "amphetamine psychosis." Paul Graham's photographs documenting the crushing bureaucracy of poverty are juxtaposed with Queenland's casts of festive balloons. Other works include Wong's prison fantasy from 1994, new paintings by Eastman and Eggerer, photography by Tribe, sculpture by Mabry, collages by Hernández, and a remarkable self-portrait by Opie from 1970. Russell Ferguson is a curator and writer based in Los Angeles and is Chair of the Department of Art at UCLA. From 2001, he was Deputy Director and Chief Curator at the Hammer Museum, Los Angeles, where he remains Adjunct Curator and recently organized "Francis Alÿs : Politics of Rehearsal." Ferguson is the editor of two collections of critical writing: Discourses: Conversations in Postmodern Art and Culture and Out There: Marginalization and Contemporary Cultures, both published by the MIT Press.

We are pleased to announce an exhibition of new work by artist Anish Kapoor. This suite of monumental sculptures will encompass two galleries and inaugurate Gladstone's second location at 530 West 21st Street. In his continual search for manifestations of the sublime, Kapoor explores the expressive properties of various materials and their relationship to form. The dynamic interplay between the work of art and its surroundings make the viewer a vital catalyst initiating the latent sensual capabilities of sculpture. In this exhibition of new works, Kapoor reconfigures both purity and earthiness in materials as divergent as polished stainless steel and dyed wax. Working in a scale simultaneously monumental and intimate, these sculptures convey both technological feats and the haptic qualities of craft. Kapoor's fascination with the optical phenomenology of surfaces extends to what is below and beyond. As he has said, he strives for his materials to be able "to make something else possible… the non-physical things, the intellectual things, the possibilities that are available through the material." His wrought surfaces only flourish in negating their own limitations, while expanding innumerable possibilities in the mind of the viewer. Using highly polished stainless steel and vibrant colors, Kapoor draws upon the wonder and passions of the sublime, and our capabilities to see the very fibers of our ontology. Despite the new materials and techniques that he continually investigates, his work never strays from its mythological grounding, as if the experience of viewing contemplates both established history and a subjective present. In the undulating curves of form, in the passions elicited from the manipulation of material, Kapoor's sculptures stem from a universal experience of the world, while offering a wholly new vision of it. As Homi Bhabha wrote, Kapoor's works become a "living tissue, a contingent and relational medium," that seek to elevate the act of viewing to the level of spiritual awakening. Anish Kapoor, born in 1954 in Bombay, India, has lived and worked in London since 1973. Solo exhibitions include Baltic Center for Contemporary Art, Gateshead; CAPC Musée d'art contemporain de Bordeaux; Centro Galego de Arte Contemporanea, Santiago de Compostela; Hayward Gallery, London; Schirn Kunsthalle, Frankfurt; Fondazione Prada, Milan; DePont Foundation, Tilburg; Kunsthaus Bregenz; Museo Archeologico Nazionale, Naples; and recently at Haus der Kunst, Munich. In 1990 he was awarded the Premio Duemila for representing Great Britain at the Venice Biennale, and received the Turner Prize in 1991. Later this month, the Institute of Contemporary Art/Boston opens Kapoor's first major U.S. museum show in more than 15 years, featuring works spanning three decades of the artist's career. Cloudgate, his monumental permanent sculpture in Chicago's Millennium Park, will soon be joined by a stone monument in New York's Hanover Square for the British Memorial Garden, commemorating the British victims of 9/11.

We are pleased to announce an exhibition of over 500 drawings by German-born Swiss artist Dieter Roth. Covering a vast terrain throughout his career, producing prints, sculpture, installation, audio and video, Roth thoroughly documented his subjective view of the world while eluding any easy classification. The thirty-six bundled groups of drawings on view were created between 1977 and 1990 and represent a central part of his oeuvre, despite their rare showings during his life. While appearing in the Kopiebucher (Copy Books) that he created in small editions during his life, this exhibition marks the US debut of some of these most telling and essential works from this fascinating artist. Roth collected and bound these works on paper in unique books that he mostly kept private during his life, turning them into a wondrous archive of the artist's mind. Just as he exhibited the dexterity of his skill in creating objects from such disparate materials, such as chocolate and sausage, his drafting techniques range from simple graphite lines to more swirling compositions rendered from multiple layers of ink and gouache over-painting. Working in series allowed Roth to sustain his flowing train of thought, while permitting his constant experimentation with texture and imagery. Though some works may seem unfinished, failed, or hastily dashed-off, in each work his gestural fluidity spirals closer to a portrait of the mind in constant production. The diary would be an apt metaphor for the position these played in his conceptual view of the world, as the continued insistence upon his working mind as subject shades each group of drawings with the impressions and feelings that filled his day-to-day life. As Theodora Vischer wrote in her preface to his retrospective "Roth Time: A Dieter Roth Retrospective," "Art and life for Roth flowed readily into each other and were impossible to separate." It is this impossibility of classification, supported by his continual experimentation and pioneering methodologies across media that rightly secures his singular position within art history. Dieter Roth was born in 1930 in Germany and died in 1998. During his life he worked mostly in Switzerland, but also spent large amounts of time in Iceland. Early in his career, Roth was closely associated with the Swiss "concrete" artists, though his interest in working in perishable media previously disregarded within the hierarchy of artistic production ushered in a new period of development. In addition to exhibitions all over the world, including representing Switzerland in the 1982 Venice Biennale, Roth also taught both in Europe and the United States. In 2003 the exhibition "Roth Time: A Dieter Roth Retrospective" was organized by the Schaulager, Basel, and traveled to Museum Ludwig, Köln, and The Museum of Modern Art and P.S. 1 Contemporary Art Center in New York.

We are pleased to announce an exhibition of new work by Andro Wekua. Viewing the past as a spiral of infinite reoccurrence, he creates enigmatic tableaux questioning the intersections of history, memory, and fantasy. In the new sculpture, paintings, collages, and film included in this exhibition, Wekua explores history as a chain of repeating events and emotions, that both heightens a sense of disassociation even as it sustains one's inner-life. Many elements of Wekua's formal language reappear throughout the various media he employs. Images that could be family snapshots or advertisements haunt the base layers of his collages as the artist's hand drowns them in color, traces attenuated facial features, and obliterates the composition with interlocking geometric shapes. The question lingers whether what is buried is lost, or purposefully hidden. Out of these collages emerge not just recurring images but also the basic formal grammar of Wekua's visual world. The young boys and girls ripped from the photo albums or magazines, scarred or decorated in the collages, become the sculptures isolated in colored vitrines, or hiding on tabletops. While sometimes a very literal boundary separates these children from the outside world, in many cases these figures are secluded by unknown forces, whether self-imposed or the product of past experience. This estrangement creates an uncanny sensation as twinned figures seemingly stand-in for the possibilities of autobiography or for the ramifications of earlier events. Through these doppelgangers, he explores an infinite division of self as the prerequisite for the desires that structure self-image. Wekua betrays the exuberant colors and fantastic vignettes as tinseled disguises for melancholy nostalgia. While his engagement with the past elicits a sense of lonely isolation, there seems to be a palpable desire for a shared understanding of one's inner life that unites the various enigmatic mis-en-scene through doubling. In his new film, Wekua tracks these reoccurrences, drawing a connection between the stasis of immobility and existential repetition. Andro Wekua was born in 1977 in Georgia, and studied visual arts there and in Basel, Switzerland. He has been the subject of solo exhibitions at numerous museums, including Neue Kunst Halle, St. Gallen, Switzerland; The Rubell Family Collection, Miami; Kunstmuseum Winterthur, Switzerland; Museum Boijmans van Beuningen, Rotterdam; and Hydra Workshops, Greece; and he has participated in various group shows including the 4th Berlin Biennial in 2006. He will have upcoming exhibitions at the Camden Arts Center, London; the De Haalen Haarlem; and Le Magasin, Grenoble. A fully illustrated artist's book will accompany this exhibition.

We are pleased to announce an exhibition of new video installations and photographs by artist Shirin Neshat, her third solo exhibition at the gallery. Neshat's work engages the viewer through powerful images, sweeping scores, and evocations of human passions and desires, while examining the social tropes that both stratify and unite. Neshat pitches these dialectics of East/West, man/woman, and oppressor /oppressed, to such a degree that these seemingly immutable polarities become malleable locations for query. In two new films and accompanying photographs, Neshat continues her exploration of Shahrnush Parsipur's novel Women Without Men. In adapting the magical realism of Parsipur's fantastic retelling of the 1953 coup d'etat in which the CIA reinstalled the Shah of Iran, Neshat continues a project she began in 2003. Neshat dissects the individual narrative threads of Parsipur's interwoven tale of five Iranian women as they each seek freedom from their oppressive lives. Their struggle parallels that of their nation, a country in crisis fighting for a sense of independence from foreign forces. Neshat's project is two-pronged, consisting of a feature length film as well as a series of video installations exploring the psychologies of the five main female characters. MUNIS follows the story of young woman whose intense passions for social justice are perpetually stymied by her oppressive brother. Happening to witness the death of a political activist drives Munis to take her own life, beginning a magical encounter between herself and the dead activist. Only in death can Munis finally experience the strange carnival of political unrest; however, she finds that 'reality' in close proximity can be both promising and disillusioning. FAEZEH explores the anguish of a religious woman whose dreams of marriage and family are shattered by rape. Escaping the city to a magical orchard, she encounters visions of a veiled woman driving her to madness. This piece ultimately captures the emotional, psychological breakdown of a Muslim woman whose entire sense of conviction, morality and religious faith is crushed after a sexual assault. Uniting three of the characters from the novel, Neshat explores the unique sexual, political, psychological and religious dilemmas that emerge during this pivotal time in Iranian history. Shirin Neshat was born in Qazvin, Iran, and moved to the United States in 1974. She currently lives and works in New York. She has had solo exhibitions at the Museo de Arte Moderno, Mexico City; Contemporary Arts Museum, Houston; Walker Art Center, Minneapolis; Espoo Museum of Modern Art, Finland; Castello di Rivoli, Turin; Dallas Museum of Art; Wexner Center, Columbus; the Art Institute of Chicago; the Serpentine Gallery, London; Museo de Arte Contemporaneo in Leon, Spain; and the Hamburger Bahnhof, Berlin. She has been included in Documenta XI, the 1999 Venice Biennale, and the 2000 Whitney Biennial. She was awarded the First International Award at 48th Venice Biennale, the Hiroshima Freedom Prize, and the Lillian Gish Prize.

We are pleased to announce an exhibition of new work by Magnus Plessen. In these new paintings, Plessen continues to explore the absence that haunts structures of vision. Drawing upon the relationship between the primacy of paint and the object rendered, Plessen leaves compositions un-integrated, and thus open to be seen merely as the spaces of life. In this new body of work, the scraped brushstrokes both fill the surface of the canvas, as well as designate boundaries of emptiness. Teetering on the edge of visual unification, Plessen's interplay of positive and negative spaces revolves around the physicality of paint upon a canvas, marking both what remains present and that which has been removed. In a recent interview, Plessen remarked, "I have asked myself where the image is, is it in front of me or is it within me? When I'm working, I imagine building up the image from behind, stepping into the inside of the picture, turning around and painting the brushstroke from the underside…I was both inside and outside." The new work included in this show seems to expand upon this notion of interior and exterior locations of the image, specifically in the painting In and Out of My Shirt, 2006. Here, hatched outlines in multiple colors and thicknesses seem to unpeel and reveal the titular object; however, the figure of the painter does not seem to emerge from beneath the folds. Rather, the object rendered seems to swallow the composition, and in turn itself, betraying the skids of a vortex along the surface. In other work, Plessen turns to a quasi-tactile reflection of his world. Instead of removing the figure, in Untitled, 2006, he presents a contemporary Madonna and child, shimmering shadow-like between the vibrations of scraped brushstrokes. Here the sensuous surface seems to touch reality, although the true identities of the figures never stay in focus. In this way, the painter isolates himself, drawing from life only to sacrifice his subjects to a highly-subjective notion of objectivity. However, within these unresolved compositions, there is space, both positive and negative, in which vision guards the presence of life. Magnus Plessen was born in 1967 in Hamburg, Germany. His paintings have been the subject of numerous solo exhibitions, including the Neues Kunstmuseum in Luzern, K21 Kunstsammlung Nordrhein-Westfalen in Düsseldorf, P.S. 1 in New York, the Centre Pompidou in Paris, and the Art Institute of Chicago. His work was also included in the fiftieth Venice Biennale in 2003. This exhibition is accompanied by a fully illustrated catalogue with a text by Francesco Bonami.

We are pleased to present an exhibition of important works by Alighiero e Boetti. Born in Turin in 1940, Boetti became associated with a group of artists whose groundbreaking work Germano Celant would feature in his exhibition "Arte Povera" in 1967. Both acutely logical and touchingly personal, his work realigns the structures of culture along conceptual principles based in part on assumed linguistic and numerical codes. Throughout his various works covering a broad aesthetic terrain, there remains a system: Whether deconstructed, or merely reordered, Boetti configures methods of communication and dissemination to elaborate upon the personal, social, and political intersections of daily life. In his I Gemelli works begun in 1968, Boetti altered photographs so that he appeared to be holding the hand of his identical twin. This doubling and, crucially, division prefigure Boetti's renaming himself Alighiero e Boetti. In separating his first and last name, becoming Alighiero and Boetti, he exposes the dual nature that structures identity, symbolically dividing himself from his name. He said: "While a name is unique, a surname is already a category, a means of classification . . ." His work searches to pry open the hand-holding dualities inherent in the communication of ideas, but also serve to examine how difference and opposition supply meaning. The fluctuation that he recognized in all systems permitted Boetti to re/solve the surrounding world. In his "Biro" pieces, phrases emerge not from contiguous patterns of letters but from an holistic approach to alphabetical annotation. Meanwhile, his "Mappa" works course the very ordering of the world, tracking the geopolitical changes that shifted cartography between 1971 and 1994. The sources and materials he used remained common from ballpoint pens to magazine covers, and in keeping his antecedents recognizable, Boetti directs the viewer to reconsider the notions of order and disorder structuring the surrounding world. Just as Boetti commissioned Afghan weavers to embroider the "Mappa" series, the viewer of his works becomes complicit, and essential, in the completion. Alighiero Boetti's solo exhibitions include: Stedelijk Van Abbemuseum, Eindhoven; The Venice Biennale; Kunstverein Münster; Centre National d'Art Contemporain, Grenoble; Museum of Contemporary Art, Los Angeles; DIA Center for the Arts, New York; The Institute for Contemporary Art P.S.1 Museum, New York; Galleria Civica d'Arte Moderna e Contemporanea, Turin; Galleria Nazionale d'Arte Moderna, Rome; Museum für Moderne Kunst, Frankfurt; and Whitechapel Art Gallery, London. Alighiero e Boetti died in 1994.

We are pleased to announce the first solo exhibition in New York of German artist Alexandra Bircken. Bircken's sculpture combines found objects from nature, such as branches and stones, with wool, plastic, wax, and concrete to form works that are both delicate and sturdy. Often the works evoke aspects of both natural and urban landscapes, perplexing the viewer with the arcane correlations between materials and their abstract referents, as well as teasing out the internal tensions of an object made of discontinuous media. For this exhibition, Bircken's constructions of wool and wood expand upon her unique take on abstract sculpture and its relationship to the concrete figurations that surround us. A prominent aspect of Bircken's work, though, remains how the roughhewn and almost precarious structure so eloquently evokes the happenstance interactions between the natural and inorganic spheres. The geometries of her bricolage reconstruct the patterns of life often overlooked: the interruption of plant life into the monotony of paving stones, vines creeping up and overcoming the rails and posts of a fence. Whether carefully covering twigs in knit sheaths, pitching pigmented wax against formal structure, or expertly balancing stacks of various natural objects, Bircken strives to make formal and technically precise echoes of the happy disorganization that surrounds us. Her seemingly rudimentary materials, which at first glance take on the look of detritus, belie their simplicity of appearance and relate the artist's sophisticated and sympathetic observation of both the natural and urban worlds. Alexandra Bircken currently lives and works in Köln, Germany. She has had solo exhibitions at BQ Gallery in Köln and Herald St. in London. In addition she has been included in many group exhibitions, such as "Dereconstruction" curated by Matthew Higgs at Gladstone Gallery and "5 Sculptors" at Westfälischer Kunstverein in Münster, Germany. This fall she will be included in "Unmonumental" the inaugural exhibition at New York's New Museum.

We are pleased to announce a group exhibition of contemporary artists working with ceramic. While master potters and ceramicists have long explored the medium, a number of artists now incorporate the material into a larger practice, often in surprising and increasingly inventive ways. Drawn from sculptors, painters, and other practitioners, the international roster includes both established and emerging artists, those who have long worked in ceramic, and those coming to the medium afresh. Kai Althoff Anne Chu Sam Durant Urs Fischer Peter Fischli/ David Weiss Richard Hawkins Mary Heilmann Matt Johnson Anish Kapoor Mike Kelley Klara Kristalova Liz Larner Andrew Lord Sarah Lucas Victor Man Jonathan Meese Marisa Merz William J. O'Brien Manfred Pernice Alessandro Pessoli Elizabeth Peyton Ken Price Thomas Schütte Ricky Swallow Gert and Uwe Tobias Rosemarie Trockel Rebecca Warren Paloma Varga Weisz Andro Wekua The works in "Makers and Modelers" represent a variety of styles, textures, scales, and approaches to ceramic, some departing from the artist's previous work, while others strive to promote a sense of continuity with other media. As the title of the exhibition suggests, the works in the show are either hand-built or constructed, stem from unexpected source materials, and expand upon sensibilities normally associated with other media. Sometimes paired with other substances, the works in the show emphasize process and question the relationships between objecthood and material. No longer just the vessels and other earthenware historically associated with the medium, the works in the exhibition play off or depart from established formal and technical precedents of ceramics. A fully illustrated catalogue with an essay by Klaus Kertess will accompany the exhibition.

Gladstone Gallery and Team are pleased to announce their collaboration on an exhibition of new work by Banks Violette. The exhibitions will run from the 6th of July through the 17th of August 2007. Team Gallery is located at 83 Grand Street, cross streets Wooster and Greene, on the ground floor. Gladstone Gallery is located at 515 West 24th Street, cross streets Tenth and Eleventh Avenues, on the ground floor. Banks Violette, whose interests both in minimalist form and in the transmissions of subcultural communities have determined the course of his artistic practice since 2000, has been increasingly drawn to collaboration as the conceptual support for his installations. These collaborations have, more often than not, paired Violette with Stephen O'Malley, the musician most frequently associated with the drone metal band Sunn O))). O'Malley, for example, has now worked closely with Violette on three major projects with this new exhibition functioning as a continued bridge with these previous installations. A battery of materials, and their deployment in stage-like and other performative and theatrical platforms, has also kept the practice grounded within a rich matrix of art historical, philosophical and socio-economic associations. As likely to use steel and salt as fabric and light, Violette shifts a viewer's perspective by always implying more than what is on view. There is always a ghostly other that sits besides the installations and which frequently exists long-afterwards in the memories of spectators. This is Banks Violette's third solo show at Team, his first at Gladstone. A publication, designed by Stephen O'Malley and with an essay by Neville Wakefield, will accompany the exhibitions. Violette's last solo show in New York was held in 2005 at the Whitney Museum of American Art. This marks the first time since 2002 that Violette has done a solo show at a gallery in New York. Violette is currently included in The Shapes of Space exhibition at the Guggenheim Museum in New York and the Bastard Creature exhibition at the Palais de Tokyo in Paris. He has also shown his work at Zürich's Migros Museum fur Gegenwartskunst, the Kunstmuseum St. Gallen, the Schirn Kunsthalle in Frankfurt, and at Rotterdam's Museum Boijimans van Beuningen. Violette has shown his work at galleries in Brussels, Tokyo, Los Angeles, Munich, Vienna and Oslo, among others. He was included in the 2004 Whitney Biennial and in last Fall's USA Today exhibition at the Royal Academy in London. His most recent monographic exhibition was held at the Kunsthall in Bergen, Norway. Violette's work is in numerous public collections, including, in New York alone, the Guggenheim Museum, the Whitney and the Museum of Modern Art.

We are pleased to announce its first exhibition with artist Kai Althoff. Living and working in Germany, Althoff creates imaginary environments in which paintings, sculpture, drawing, video, and found objects commingle. Borrowing from moments of history, religious iconography, and counter-cultural movements, the evocative context is propped upon narratives simultaneously arcane yet familiar, at once deeply personal yet universal. Often collaborating with fellow artists, Althoff will work with Nick Z, a Brooklyn-based graffiti artist, for this exhibition. As curator Nicolas Baume wrote in his catalogue essay accompanying Althoff's recent solo exhibition "Kai KeinRespekt (Kai NoRespect)" at the Institute of Contemporary Art, Boston: "To 'feel it all' for Althoff, is to explore the manifold possibilities of human subjectivity and the complex range of emotions, responses, and beliefs that enable life to go on, even under great duress… Althoff's literary imagination does more than describe its protagonists; it inhabits the characters he creates. Their visual rendering is a form of enactment through which their stories are allowed to unfold." Kai Althoff was born in Cologne, Germany, in 1966 where he continues to live and work. He has been included in numerous group shows, artistic collaborations, and solo exhibitions throughout Europe and the United States since the early 1990s. His work was exhibited in the group show "Dear Painter, Paint Me" at the Kunsthalle Vienna in 2003 and traveled to the Schirn Kunsthalle in Frankfurt and the Georges Pompidou Center in Paris. His solo exhibition "Kai KeinRespekt (Kai NoRespect)" premiered at the Institute of Contemporary Art, Boston, in 2004, before traveling to the Museum of Contemporary Art, Chicago. Most recently Althoff was included in the group exhibitions "Heart of Darkness" at the Walker Art Center in Minneapolis, and "Painting in Tongues" at the Museum of Contemporary Art, Los Angeles, and the 2006 Berlin Biennial.

We are pleased to announce an exhibition of new paintings by Carroll Dunham. Since the early 1980s when he based his exuberant organic painting style on the pre-existing knots and whirls in wood panels, Dunham's works have followed multiple courses: a formal mastery of line, texture, and color and an evolutionary investigation of psychically charged imagery. The paintings on view in this exhibition explore both of these channels and unite their differing aspects. Long synthesizing the precedents set by divergent schools of paintings, including Cubism, Abstract Expressionism, and Pop, with the cheeky graphics associated with comics and graffiti, Dunham has been able to create a body of work rich in formal accomplishment and unique in visual content. As amoebic shapes evolved into grotesque figures, his paintings became tacit observations on both painting and society. With each turn of the development, a deeper sense of consciousness reveals itself, as if various psycho-sexual drives churning below percolate to the very surface of the canvas. The most apparent symptom of these drives would be the fedora-wearing, phallus-nosed character, a lone wanderer along Dunham's conceptual trajectory. Through landscapes bulging with trash to skewed portraits in which he seems jailed behind the very geometries that outline his singular contours, this character becomes a fetish doll held in the sway of both the artist's expressions and properties of paint. Perhaps he is a monolithic totem of masochism and psychological surrender, or just a man in a grey flannel suit. Fragmented, castrated, and possibly left for dead, he keeps returning for more. As curator Asmund Thorkildsen says in his essay to Dunham's recent retrospective of small drawings, "One could say that this figure…is the provisional result of a struggle for survival. He has proved the fittest." In recent paintings, he appears splayed out across asymmetrical diptychs, exposed and vulnerable, as if Dunham ponders the question of survival at what cost. Carroll Dunham was born in 1949 and currently lives and works in New York and Connecticut. He has been the subject of numerous one-person exhibitions, including a mid-career retrospective at the New Museum in New York in 2002. His work has been included in several Whitney Biennials and in "Disparaties and Deformations: Our Grotesque," SITE Santa Fe's fifth biennial curated by Robert Storr. In 2008 a survey of his complete prints will open at the Addison Gallery of American Art in Andover, Massachusetts.

We are pleased to announce a special exhibition of works on paper by artist Anish Kapoor. Known for sculptures in which the union between organic forms and sensual materials verges on the sublime, Kapoor continues to map a spiritual terrain demarcated by a plastic vocabulary of voids, vessels, circles, and squares. Recently, his monumental pieces such as Marsyas, a Tate Unilever commission, Cloudgate, a permanent sculpture in Chicago's Millennium Park, and Sky Mirror, a Public Art Fund project in New York City, have continued this conceptual program, though these prodigious works continue to be rooted in the exploration of shape, color, and line found in his works on paper. Kapoor's gouaches have been an integral aspect of his practice from the start, and in them the viewer can discern the forms and colors that dominate his sculptural works. Rigorously working the surface of the paper, Kapoor's dense compositions recall myth, biology, and emotion. The figures that whirl across the surface or emerge from thick layers of gouache seem to be almost primeval, like Ur-signs speaking directly to innate human passions. Blood-red tendrils and black voids appear and reveal a darker, more intimately charged presence, as if these highly textured surfaces are the very corporeal tissues of the psyche. Kapoor's works on paper remain exuberant in their expressive nature, exploring the more rough-hewn and chaotic side of his fascination with the sublime. Unlike the voids in his sculpture that descend into the depths of forms, the almond-shaped oblongs that appear in many of his gouaches have a presence that seems to radiate outward; though, like the sculptures these figures hold a similar consuming thrall over the viewer. Anish Kapoor, born in 1954 in Bombay, India, has lived and worked in London since 1973. Solo exhibitions include Baltic Center for Contemporary Art, Gateshead; CAPC Musée d'art contemporain de Bordeaux; Centro Galego de Arte Contemporanea, Santiago de Compostela; Hayward Gallery, London; Schirn Kunsthalle, Frankfurt; Fondazione Prada, Milan; DePont Foundation, Tilburg; Kunsthaus Bregenz; and Museo Archeologico Nazionale, Naples. In 1990 he was awarded the Premio Duemila for representing Great Britain at the Venice Biennale, and received the Turner Prize in 1991. In the fall of 2007, Kapoor will be the subject of a retrospective at the Haus der Kunst in Munich, and in early 2008 the Institute of Contemporary Art, Boston, will mount an exhibition of his works. Kapoor has been commissioned to create a stone monument in New York's Hanover Square for the British Memorial Garden, commemorating the British victims of 9/11 Gladstone Gallery will present a special selection of sculpture and gouaches by Anish Kapoor at the ADAA Art Fair in New York, February 22 through 26, 2007.

We are pleased to announce an exhibition of new works by Huang Yong Ping. Since founding the Xiamen Dada group in China during the mid-1980s, he has garnered an international reputation as an avant-garde provocateur. Inspired by artists such as Joseph Beuys and Marcel Duchamp, Huang Yong Ping has employed various media to develop a conceptual program utilizing the power of art to instigate reform. Redefining the notion of hybridization, Huang Yong Ping conflates the symbols of Eastern and Western art historical traditions and political events to explore the intersection of individual experience and broader manifestations of culture. For this exhibition, Huang Yong Ping has constructed porcelain and ceramic replicas of historic architecture. Emphasizing space as a vessel for life, Huang Yong Ping begins his exploration with a series of jar-like wells in which various creatures emerge. He expands upon this theme with monumental recreations of the Coliseum in Rome and the Pentagon in Washington, DC. Both buildings could be seen as vessels, not only in their formal construction as buildings constructed around central courtyards, but also as fertile basins from which culture springs. From these iconic structures, violence issues forth, as both the Pentagon, as the nucleus of the United States military control, and the Coliseum, as the central arena for the Roman pastimes of blood sport, stand for imperial dominance within the course of history. Slyly, Huang Yong Ping has replaced blood and violence with lush fauna: in planting the crevices of these models with a variety of foliage, he not only reimagines these buildings as seedbeds for a more peaceful life, but in effect renders them inert. Becoming mute planters, these symbols of bloodshed and carnage grow into ruined relics, as creeping vines cover their façades. These works continue to subvert traditional modes of thinking and cultural stereotypes, which Huang Yong Ping investigates through the unique vantage of the expatriate artist. Living and working in both France and China has afforded him with the canny ability to dissect cultural production and create seemingly disparate juxtapositions which unfold into nuanced takes on history, national identity, and artistic practice. Born in 1954, Huang Yong Ping participated in the seminal exhibition "Magiciens de la Terre" at Centre Georges Pompidou, Paris in 1989, and represented France at the 1999 Venice Biennale. Last year, the Walker Art Center in Minneapolis organized and premiered his retrospective, "House of Oracles," which is on view at Mass MoCA in North Adams, Massachusetts, until February 25. Other solo exhibitions include: CCA Kitakyushu, Japan; De Appel, Amsterdam; Fondation Cartier pour l'Art Contemporain, Paris; Atelier d'Artistes de la Ville de Marseille; and New Museum of Contemporary Art, New York.

We are pleased to announce an exhibition of new work by Gary Hill, in which he masterfully incorporates aspects of installation, sound, and imagery to create poetic and thought-provoking pieces teasing out the nuances of communicative interactions. His continued investigations into the intersection between representation and language have created a body of video installations that question and reinterpret the cognitive processes that create meaning. For this exhibition, Hill will present two new works commissioned and previously shown by the Fondation Cartier pour l'art contemporain, Paris. Their New York debut will mark Gary Hill's fourth show at Gladstone Gallery. Representations of the body factor heavily into Hill's weighty investigations, which incorporate extrapolations of social roles in order to examine the current political climate. In a recent piece Guilt, Hill has created gold coins minted with his own portrait, undergoing fictive scenes of torture. Viewed from afar through telescopes, recognizing the artist's face on these miniatures at once brings the impact of humiliation into the viewer's frame of mind, highlighting, through its installation, the uneasiness of the dominate/subordinate dialectical posture so often assumed in everyday life. Hill queries the existence of a stance of viewership in which the dominant position does not come into play. In light of the images of Abu Ghraib having been seared into the common memory, what does the telescopic view of suffering achieve, if only to vouchsafe a position of domination within communicative forms? Hill's installation, through its use of the metaphor of market exchange, distances the true impact of brutality, even when the acts of surveillance bring it so close to the viewer's body. Using the homophone that brings to mind both shame and the gilt surface of the coin, the carefully fabricated mock currency allows for the reification of both the economic influence, as well as the psychic repercussions. In Frustrum a bar of gold bullion sits in a shallow pool of oil as an animated eagle brutally slaps its wings around a transmission tower. Hill recorded the sound of bullwhips cracking to punctuate the violent movement of the eagle's wings, bringing a critical edge to this de facto emblem of American occupation in the Middle East. His continued use of gold further emphasizes the conflation of monetary interest and military motivation with oil being the intermediary element. Atop the floating bar of gold, the motto "For everything which is visible is a copy of that which is hidden" is embossed, its cryptic message seeming to relate that for all the political jargon surrounding the invasion of Iraq, the hidden and twinned motivation is the economic profit of oil. Hill's insistence on bringing forth the conflation of gold and oil, politics and violence seemingly rebuilds the codes of communication surrounding recent global events, in effect reworking the accepted signs proffered by the state to reinstitute a construction of meaning meant to reveal hidden political machinations. Gary Hill was born in 1951 in California and currently lives and works in Seattle. In addition to his recent show at the Fondation Cartier pour l'art contemporain, Hill has been the subject of numerous solo exhibitions and projects, including his 2005 projection onto the ruins of the Coliseum in Rome; a traveling survey organized by the Kunstmuseum Wolfsburg, Germany in 1999; and an exhibition at the Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, New York in 1995. His work has been included in the Whitney Biennial in 1983, and the Venice Biennales in 1984 and 1999. In 2003 he won the Skowhegan Medal for Video Installation. "Gary Hill" is on view at the Fondation Cartier pour l'art contemporain, Paris, through February 4, 2007.

We are pleased to announce its first exhibition of work by Robert Bechtle. For over forty years, Bechtle's paintings and works on paper have consistently mined a uniquely American terrain, depicting with awe-inspiring accuracy his friends, family, and most notably the car-lined streets of his San Francisco neighborhood. Throughout, Bechtle has continually honed his remarkable ability to capture the stilled atmosphere of life through complex compositions and a constant exploration of painting technique. The recent body of work on view in this exhibition does not diverge in terms of content; however, as Linda Nochlin notes in her accompanying catalogue essay, "There is a new sense of finality, of pathos, of darkness, in subject matter, color, and composition." In his essay on Bechtle's work, Michael Auping noted that he "is an artist who never allows his vision to take light for granted. His paintings subtly but invariably pull our focus from observable details to the conditions of luminosity that makes these things visible." Whether it is the irradiated glint of afternoon glare reflecting on a car's metallic bumper, or the burnished glow of a streetlight bathing the hood of a truck, Bechtle manipulates paint to capture the particular temperaments of light and creates an atmosphere at once so recognizable, yet so distant. His compositions literally come from the other side of the street, opening for contemplation the seemingly common vistas of American life. In a recent series of self-portraits, Bechtle turns a somewhat uncanny eye towards himself, humbly depicting himself and his art through the vantage of his age. Set against the humdrum backdrop of a working-class town, these ruminations on the artist's own maturity reveal his artistic practice to be his very life-line. The gaze of Bechtle as himself and as artist become one: The vacillations of light he observes on his own face are the same atmospheric changes he has witnessed in his daily surroundings throughout his career. Despite the shifts of age, and with them the makes and models of the cars, Bechtle's view has remained the same, and he has continued to find those moments so embedded in American life that when he captures them in paint, he reveals the austerity and anxiety that runs below the shimmer of new cars and suburban streets. Robert Bechtle was born in 1932 in San Francisco, where he continues to live and work. His paintings have been included in major group exhibitions internationally since the 1960s, including "The Artist as His Subject" at the Museum of Modern Art, New York; Documenta 5 in Kassel, Germany; "The American Century: Art and Culture, 1950-2000" at the Whitney Museum of American Art, New York; "Les Anneés Pop" at the Centre Pompidou, Paris; and "Infinite Painting," at Villa Manin Centro d' Art Contemporanea, in Codroipo, Italy. In 2004, the San Francisco Museum of Modern Art organized a lauded retrospective of his work that traveled to the Modern Art Museum of Fort Worth, Texas, and the Corcoran Gallery of Art in Washington, DC. Bechtle was awarded the Francis J. Greenberger Award for continued excellence in painting in 2003. A fully illustrated catalogue with an essay by noted art historian Linda Nochlin will accompany the exhibition.

We are pleased to announce a new exhibition of work by German artist Rosemarie Trockel. Rising to prominence during the heyday of 1980s Cologne, Trockel's astonishing works move between drawing, sculpture, video, and the wool paintings for which she is well known. Her vernacular of knitted patterns, stoves, and grotesque zoology often engenders a reading incorporating notions surrounding themes of art itself, femininity and the labor of inner-life. While seemingly working within known genres, Trockel's juxtaposition of imagery and use of craft bring forth aspects of the unknown and bewildering in everyday objects. Trockel employs materials that are once on-hand, but seem removed from their original context. This displacement yields a fanciful evocation of a singular world in which the domestic sphere is turned into an open and ambiguous space full of possibility: craft material begins to alter and the representation of what seems real shifts into another image, allowing new readings of form and abstraction. The shifting of genre (or Gattung in German) further raise the level of enigma: How do Trockel's works serve to (dis)locate a place of femininity outside of the framework of masculine production? For her new exhibition, knitted paintings cohabitate with ceramics to create a specific mis-en-scene. The titular country life seems to connote a notion of escape from the pressures of urban sophistication, and in Trockel's case adds momentum to her taking off from typical social codes making the rupture between the self, the other, and political identity visible. The works only further serve to evoke and to put into question, rather than to pinpoint: "In place of any discernible narrative structure, she typically isolates specific moments to represent larger, more complex sequences of events," writes Susan Harris. The country, then, becomes the location of both possibility and displacement, where Trockel visualizes new contexts. Rosemarie Trockel was born in Schwerte, West Germany in 1952, and currently lives and works in Cologne. She has been the subject of numerous solo exhibitions at the Moderne Museet, Stockholm; the Dia Center for the Arts, New York; Whitechapel Art Gallery, London; and Centre Georges Pompidou, Paris. In 2004 she received the Wolfgang-Hahn-Priese, resulting in the one-woman exhibition "Post-Menopause" which premiered at the Museum Ludwig in Cologne before traveling to the Museo Nazionale Delle Arti Del XXI Secolo in Rome. Trockel was the sole representative of Germany in the 1999 Venice Biennale.

We are pleased to announce an exhibition of new work by Marisa Merz. A major figure in the Arte Povera movement of the 1960s and 70s, Marisa Merz's lyrical works entangle the viewer into a poetic intimacy. In her drawings, ceramics, and sculptures of wire and fabric, delicate abstractions emerge to create spaces of female subjectivity. Within, curious figures oft appear as heads straining heavenward, their features materializing from intricate mazes of line and molded clay. The reoccurring material on which her oeuvre is dependent could be seen as Merz's own consciousness; as she has said, "There has never been any division between my life and my work." Refashioning the labyrinth of her own intimate thoughts and her relationships with husband Mario Merz and daughter in common means, ties her art to the founding tenets of Arte Povera which favored ordinary and organic materials in an effort to subvert the elite status of the art object and rethink the role of process. Through focusing on her own subjectivity and using craft techniques to ground her fanciful works in the infinite possibilities of the everyday, Merz advanced a critical framework drawing on traditional customs associated with female domesticity. Her work is not just made in her home, but rather creates that sphere necessary for her exploration. In a new series of works on paper, Merz has applied layers of gold leaf, reminiscent of the net-like constructions she created out of woven threads, from which her brood of extraordinary doppelgangers emerge. Recalling Byzantine mosaics, the attenuated and abstracted features become more humanistic portraits than realistic. Merz's meticulous mark-making reflects directly the gestures of her psyche, inviting each viewer into the inner spaces of her life. Marisa Merz was born in 1931 in Turin, Italy. She continues to live in and work in both Turin and Milan. Merz's solo exhibitions include the Museé National d'Art Moderne Centre Georges Pompidou, Paris; the Stedelijk Museum, Amsterdam; the Kunstmuseum Winterthur, Switzerland; and the Villa delle Rose, Galleria d'Arte Moderna, Bologna. Selected group exhibitions include the Guggenheim Museum, New York, "The Italian Metamorphosis,1943-1968"; Kunstmuseum Wolfsburg, "Die italienische Metamorphose, 1943-1968"; Hamburger Bahnhof, Berlin, "Zeitlos"; the 1988 Biennale di Venice; P.S.1., New York, "The KNOT Arte Povera at P.S.1"; Kunsthaus Zürich, "Spuren, Skulpturen, und Monumente ihrer praezisen Reise"; and "Documenta 7," Kassel. In 2001 she was awarded the Biennale di Venezia award for her lifetime contribution.

We are pleased to announce its first exhibition of work by Catherine Opie. Since the 1990s, her photographs have garnered high praise for their reworking of traditional genres, from portraiture to landscape. Blending documentary aspects with a conceptual program emphasizing the contribution of identity to the structures of community, her work has drawn from avant-queer culture to the makeshift dwellings of icehouse fishermen. With each series a strong respect for the subject and a formal elegance elevate the image from mere document to empathic creation: Freeways become ancient ruins, while a turned back becomes the wellspring of dreams. For much of her career, Opie's interest in community has led her to document different suburban and urban environments in America, from the elaborate facades of Beverly Hills homes, to the rural signage and storefronts that peopled her cross-country treks. Her blended style of formal documentary and her conceptual investigation into community lends a quasi anthropological feel to her work. As she says, "This work might exist as documentation 700 years from now when somebody comes across the photographs and they are able to put together some notion of civilization through the city and the structures that existed. I am really interested in the idea of an archeologist being able to figure out how we lived through found artifacts and what was constructed." Exhibited for the first time together, the gallery will show Opie's black and white photographs of architecture particular to five cities: Los Angeles, St. Louis, Minneapolis, New York, and Chicago. Because Opie spent so much time in each of these environs, she cannily captures those unique aspects that readily inform and recall the life of each. In Los Angeles, she turned her lens to nondescript mini-malls, while in Minneapolis she focused on the skyways that circulate above snowy ground. The winding narrow alleys off Wall Street open into soaring urban vistas in her views of New York. For St. Louis and Chicago she captured the sprawling panoramas as well as the telling details of these diverse metropolitan areas. Aesthetized and austere, these formally complex images show the deserted cities as the matrices for society. Although emptied of the people that have populated her other series, these artifacts of urban life hold sympathy for the communities that built them and the diversity of the individuals there. Catherine Opie's work has been featured in acclaimed exhibitions in the United States and Europe. She has had solo exhibitions at the Walker Art Center in Minneapolis, The Saint Louis Art Museum, the Photographers' Gallery in London, and the Museum of Contemporary Art in Los Angeles. Her work appeared in the exhibitions "Rrose is a Rrose is a Rrose: Gender Performance in Photography" at the Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum in New York and the Whitney Biennials in 1995 and 2004. Currently, her work can be seen in an exhibition at the Museum of Contemporary Art, Chicago and in the SITE Santa Fe Biennial while a touring survey will be on view at the Museum of Contemporary Art, Cleveland this fall.

We are pleased to announce DERECONSTRUCTION an exhibition curated by Matthew Higgs. For this group show, Higgs brings together a number of emerging and established artists from the United States and Europe to align across generations certain practices and tendencies in (re)structuring the object in the visual field. DERECONSTRUCTION seeks to consider and conflate the physical and psychological processes of fragmentation ("deconstruction") and reassembly ("reconstruction"). Exploring relationships between "collage," "assemblage" and "constructivism"—as art historical categories and also as contemporaneous emotional and social conditions—the exhibition embraces a broad range of approaches and methodologies, including painting, sculpture, drawing, text, tapestry, photography, and video. DERECONSTRUCTION brings together an international and inter-generational group of artists whose work explores—and explodes—vernacular materials and forms. Self-consciously located at a threshold between abstraction and representation, the works in the exhibition variously consider the entanglements between "interiority" and "exteriority"; between the "organic" and the "inorganic"; and between the acts of "rupture" and "reconciliation." The exhibition will be accompanied by a publication including a text by Matthew Higgs and contributions from the participating artists: Rita Ackermann Markus Amm Alexandra Bircken Carter Steven Claydon Bruce Conner Vincent Fecteau Will Fowler Christopher Knowles Udomsak Krisanamis Takeshi Murata AR Penck Eileen Quinlan Lucas Samaras Judith Scott Frances Stark Linder Sterling John Stezaker B. Wurtz Matthew Higgs is an artist, writer, and curator based in New York. Since November 2004 he has been the director and chief curator of White Columns, New York's oldest alternative, not-for-profit art space. Over the past 15 years Higgs has organized more than one hundred exhibitions and projects with artists. A regular contributor to Artforum, his writing has recently appeared in publications for Christian Marclay, John McCracken, Oliver Payne & Nick Relph, and Elizabeth Peyton, amongst others.

We are pleased to present a new body of work by Sharon Lockhart. Pine Flat continues Lockhart's exploration of the formal aspects of film and photography and their interrelation. Set in the backdrop of a rural village in California's Sierra Nevada Mountains, the feature-length film and large-scale portraits focus on the community's youth and the experience of American childhood. The 16mm film Pine Flat emerged from Lockhart's desire to create a vision of youth that is more intimate, yet unspoiled by sentiment. Working without a camera crew, she interacted directly with the children living amidst the picturesque landscapes surrounding the titular hamlet. Composed of twelve fixed camera filmic portraits, each segment lasts for ten-minutes, which is the length of one reel of 16mm film. In the first six, the children engage in various solitary activities, such as a teenage boy scouting the landscape with a rifle, while in the second, groups of children interact with one another, as in a sequence involving two sisters' banter over a tree swing. With minimal direction, she was able to witness the interior vistas of a child's coming of age. For the gallery presentation, Lockhart has formatted the film installation as a double projection, screening two segments on a daily rotation, allowing the arc of the film to unfold over a period of six days. Walker Art Center director Kathy Halbreich notes of these nearly static sequences: "In many ways these images suggest a truth that weighs heavily on a responsible adult: a child's idea of life is a fiction—a futuristic imagining based on bits and pieces of parental or societal stories." These stories, though, eschew narrative in favor, perhaps, of capturing Lockhart's own hopes of recovering something lost that she sees beginning to slip through the fingers of her subjects. For the series of nineteen portrait photographs of Pine Flat's youth, Lockhart set up a traditional studio in a nearby barn, where the children could sit in the historic method. The views remain consistent in each work: a plain black background meets a no-frills cement floor in room lit only by the natural light that filtered in from the open doors. In this theatrical setting, the children develop a different kind of relationship to the camera in presenting themselves as they wish to appear. In each, Lockhart arranges the proportions so that each child fills the entire plane, despite age or size, creating an egalitarian view of the community of children. Pine Flat opens at the Walker Art Center in Minneapolis on April 22, and will be shown at Harvard University's Arthur M. Sackler Museum and the Museo do Chiado in Lisbon in the fall of 2006. A full color-catalogue with texts by Halbreich, Linda Norden, and Frances Stark will be published by Edizione Charta on the occasion of these exhibitions. Sharon Lockhart was born in 1964 and lives and works in Los Angeles. She has had solo exhibitions at international venues including the Museum Boijmans Van Beuningen Rotterdam; Kunsthalle Zurich; Museum of Contemporary Art, Chicago; Museum of Contemporary Art, San Diego; and MAK-Austrian Museum of Applied Arts, Vienna. Her films have been included in the New York Film Festival, Vienna International Film Festival, Berlin Film Festival, and the Sundance Film Festival, where Pine Flat premiered earlier this year. The New York premiere of Pine Flat will be held on Thursday, May 25 at 8PM at the Walter Reade Theater at Lincoln Center. For more information please visit www.filmlinc.com or call the box office at (212) 875-5600.

We are pleased to announce an exhibition of new work by Matthew Barney. An acclaimed artist whose conceptual program spans film, sculpture, photography, drawing, and performance, Barney's pairing of meticulously developed metaphor with seductive visual rigor has resulted in visionary masterworks in all media since the early nineties. This exhibition will consist of sculptures and drawings related to his recent project DRAWING RESTRAINT 9 and a new action DRAWING RESTRAINT 13. DRAWING RESTRAINT 9 is the most complex installment in an ongoing series begun in 1987. Barney's motivation for the series is to explore "resistance as a pre-requisite for development and a vehicle for creativity," drawing parallels between the biological system of situation/condition/production and the artistic manifestations of psychosexual drives. The feature film DRAWING RESTRAINT 9 features Barney and musician Björk, who also scored the film, as Occidental Guests aboard a whaling vessel in the Sea of Japan whose seemingly predestined meeting results in an unconventional romance. Throughout the work, Barney addresses various themes surrounding the history and culture of Japan including the Shinto religion, the tea ceremony, the history of whaling, and the supplantation of blubber with refined petroleum for oil. The drawings and sculptures featured in this exhibition focus on the relationship between the Japanese Hosts and the titular Occidental Guests, the male and female protagonists whose subsequent transformation powers the film's action. From the guests' partaking in a tea ceremony to the historical backdrop of General MacArthur's lifting of the whaling moratorium, Barney figures the social, historical, and formal aspects of the host/guest dynamic as a method of physical and psychological restraint. To this effect, Barney creates sculptures recalling the architecture of the vessel and the physical transformations that take place. Large-scale thermoplastic sculptures echo the host/guest relationship, while functioning as a facility for unrestrained organic overflow. Relating this discourse in a series of graphite and mixed media drawings, Barney captures the film's symbology in eroticized images that chart the effects of physical limitation and libidinal release. The site-specific performance DRAWING RESTRAINT 13 acts as a formal and thematic coda for the exhibition. Matthew Barney was born in 1967 and studied art at Yale University. He has received numerous awards including the Aperto prize at the 1993 Venice Biennale and the 1996 Hugo Boss Award. He has been included in group exhibitions worldwide such as Documenta IX in Kassel, Germany; the Whitney Biennials of 1993 and 1995; and the groundbreaking "Post-Human" exhibition in 1992. His solo exhibition "The Cremaster Cycle," organized by the Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, New York, traveled to the Museum Ludwig, Cologne, and the Musée d'Art Moderne de la Ville de Paris. The large-scale exhibition of the entire "Drawing Restraint" series will be on view at the San Francisco Museum of Modern Art from June 23—September 17, 2006, after touring to the 21st Century Museum of Modern Art in Kanazawa, Japan, and the Leeum, Samsung Museum of Art, Seoul, Korea, in 2005. The Museum of Modern Art and the Japan Society will premiere DRAWING RESTRAINT 9 on March 28th followed by a theatrical run at New York City's IFC Theatre beginning March 29th. The storyboards for DRAWING RESTRAINT 9 will be on view at John McWhinnie @ Glenn Horowitz Bookseller in New York City. A two-part artist's book will be available.

We are pleased to announce its first exhibition of the work of Dave Muller. Muller recasts the detritus of the art and other cultural worlds as skillfully handled watercolor-style drawings, calling into question the value of appropriation and the status of the copy. Finding inspiration in record jackets and gallery announcements as well as newspapers and comic book pages, he deftly recontextualizes the rhetorical tropes of advertising and graphic design to mine the intersection of public and personal. A deejay and musician, Muller maps his ongoing relationship with the past, present, and future of music, using record collections, musical taxonomies, and set-lists as impetus for portraits and cultural critiques. This exhibition of new work will incorporate wall drawing, works on paper, and a sound sculpture to define a sonic landscape/timeline that begins around the turn of the first millennium and projects centuries ahead into the future. Drawing the history of music's ups and downs in terms of mountains and valleys, forests and deserts, Muller expands on the tradition of landscape painting, creating a topography of music spanning across every wall of the gallery. Projecting the timeline into the years ahead, Muller translates the possibilities of music's futures into graphic terms. His backward and forward glance, though, embraces its own subjective account, bringing Muller's own thoughts on history (and its representation) to the forefront. His timeline does not attempt to be a definitive narrative on music, but instead one that exists at the interface of his personal vision and that of a shared popular culture. Muller's sound sculpture is a self-portrait as a small radio station. A computer containing his entire music library, over 74,000 songs, will play selections at random, transmitting on an FM frequency. The resulting "radio station" will broadcast to radios distributed throughout the Gladstone space. While using sound within installations has a tradition in contemporary art, Muller conflates its use within a fine-art context with other ways in which music reaches the public. Muller postulates that you are, in some respect, what you listen to. His station can broadcast songs for more than 200 days without repeat, offering an extended trip through Muller's sounds. In an essay for the catalogue to Muller's exhibition, "Connections", critic and curator Matthew Higgs elaborates on Muller's role as deejay: "Like the Great Gatsby in Fitzgerald's novel, the DJ is central to, but essentially at one remove from, the party." In this case, the party continues without the deejay. Dave Muller was born in 1964 in San Francisco. In 2002, his exhibition "Connections" premiered at the Bard Center for Curatorial Studies in Annandale-on-Hudson, NY, and traveled to the Hammer Museum in Los Angeles. He has had numerous exhibitions in the United States and abroad, including solo shows at the San Francisco Museum of Modern Art, and the St. Louis Art Museum, while he has been included in the 2004 Whitney Biennial and the 2005 and 2003 Lyon Biennials. He currently lives and works in Los Angeles.

We are pleased to announce its first exhibition of the work of Andro Wekua. For his solo New York gallery debut, the Georgian-born artist will create a large-scale sculptural installation paired with paintings and works on paper. Currently living and working in Switzerland, his work evokes the displacement of the refugee and internalized angst of those growing up witness to national strife. Beginning with his personal history, Wekua translated the fragmented abstractions of memory into the narrative cues that inform his work. The pain of war and effects of loss burgeon on the surface of his work as he exorcises the conflicted emotions surrounding his youth in war-torn Georgia. The feeling of dispossession is palpable in every work, giving each the feeling of homemade relics capturing both the sadness and joy he experienced during his childhood. Within somewhat ominous tableaux of child-like figures lost amongst ceramic landscapes recalling forests and oceans, Wekua's unique vocabulary combines a sweet nostalgia for youth with an almost masochistic relish for history's decay. Based on visions of himself as a child, these doppelgangers harbor a tragic fragility, as they are often blinded or seemingly burned. The fanciful figures of the sculptures reappear in both his paintings and collages in quasi disfigured states. Pointed noses grow from the heads of models from vintage magazines, while figures walk through foreboding yet placeless landscapes. His soulful and enigmatic imagery becomes almost ritualistic in how it recreates an abstracted vision of personal history, national strife, and imagined refuge. Andro Wekua was born in 1977 in Georgia, and studied visual arts there and in Basel, Switzerland. In 2005, his solo show "That Would Have Been Wonderful" was exhibited at the Neue Kunsthalle in St. Gallen, Switzerland, and was also featured at the Rubell Family Collection in Miami. This summer he will be the subject of an exhibition at the Kunstmuseum Winterthur curated by Dieter Schwartz.

We are pleased to announce an exhibition of new work by Thomas Hirschhorn. Just as in his solo debut in 2002, "Cavemanman," he will once more create an installation spanning the entire space of the gallery. Unlike his previous show, where he created a succession of cave dwellings for a Utopia-loving hermit, "Superficial Engagement" will contain a series of platforms exploring the intersection of the destruction of war and the creation of art. Originally a student of graphic design, his eye for the communicative effect of images is at its most trenchant in his juxtapositions that pit the gloss of fashion ads with the grit of photojournalism. The events of the world, both the violence and glamour, cannot be cast aside; the imagery that stares back from the news reflects and creates the collective view of the world. This form of "superficial engagement," as the artist dubs it, keeps the argument on the surface, not giving room to pundits or politicians to equivocate. As he puts it in his own formulation of the show, "To go deeply into something, I first must begin with the surface. The truth of things, its own logic, is reflected on the surface." The current climate of constant war and oppression worldwide particularly provokes Hirschhorn's critical inquiry, as he considers his art and his political activism to be inseparable. Combining found imagery and texts, bound up in low-tech constructions of cardboard, foil, and packing tape, he props imagistic assaults in a DIY-fashion that correlates to the intellectual scavenging and sensory overload designed to simulate the artist's own process of grappling with the excess of information in his daily life. For this new exhibition, his gallery-wide installation explores the intersection of political critique and art through a variety of channels. Hirschhorn's belief in art's ability to educate and heal compels him to engage current events and critical theories, while simultaneously investigating historical and formal aspects of art. Taking inspiration from Emma Kunz, a Swiss artist, healer, and medium, and his own fascination with nail-and-wire crafts, he fashioned his work as an optical assault meant to override the terror and oppression of recent international events with images of beauty meant to engage the empathic reasoning of the viewer. His four vibrant platforms create differentiated spaces with various sculptural elements meant to coalesce our time and tap into universal roots. Through these disparate, decorative, and deconstructive pieces, he hopes "to give form to a mega-historical viewpoint"; in his words, "I want to do artwork beyond history. Not against history." Thomas Hirschhorn was born in 1957 in Bern, Switzerland and now lives and works in Paris. He has been the subject of numerous solo exhibitions, recently including the Institute of Contemporary Art, Boston; Centre Georges Pompidou, Paris; Museu d'Art Contemporani, Barcelona; Kunsthaus Zürich; Art Institute of Chicago; and Museum Ludwig, Cologne. In 2003 he founded the Musée Précaire Albinet, a temporary interactive art and community space in Aubervilliers, France. Currently, he has a solo exhibition entitled "Anschool II" at the Museu Serralves in Porto, Portugal. Additionally, he has taken part in many international group exhibitions, including Documenta 11 in Kassel, Germany, where his large-scale public work, Bataille Monument, was on view. Hirschhorn was the recipient of the Prix Marcel Duchamp in 2000 and the Joseph Beuys-Preis in 2004.

We are pleased to announce an exhibition of new work by Lari Pittman. Born in 1952 in Glendale, California, the Los Angeles-based painter has made a reputation with a distinctive and innovative vocabulary, unlike any other painter working today. Marrying the American traditions of AbEx and Pop, his remarkably complex compositions bear a direct lineage to the expressive flatness of Pollock and the everyday appropriations of Warhol. Reassembling visual cues from both historic and banal origins, his works directly tackle issues of art history, interpretation, and selfhood. Pittman's paintings on canvas and wood panel layer graphic elements of everyday life, creating beguiling and imaginative realms, reflecting the often maze-like qualities of the modern world. Slick and unblemished, these mural-like works are compiled of juxtaposed imagery that seems so familiar to the viewer, largely as they reference stock illustration, signage, and design. However, behind his obsessively detailed and densely packed surfaces, Pittman logically constructs narratives based on part-to-part and part-to-whole formal relationships whose visual order creates its own language. But linguistic order is not the end to his painterly means, as critic Doug Harvey notes, "The literalist A=1, B=2 ratio implies that the hidden message is the one indispensable component of the artwork, and once it's been teased from its camouflage, the camouflage can be discarded. Nothing could be further from the truth." More than complex rebuses, Pittman strives to evoke subtle and abstract personal statements on selfhood and society, which are often ineffable. In the end, the whole is larger than the sum of its parts, creating an all-over environment in which the captivated viewer can lose himself in the act of the gaze and the enigma of the subject. In his new body of work, Pittman turns away from the grand landscapes of the contemporary world and focuses instead on individual rooms and the surrounding garden of a fictitious house, in a sense recreating a home within the gallery. Just as psychoanalysis uses domestic spaces as stand-ins for the realms of the subconscious, Pittman's baroque reconfiguration of a typical domestic sphere comments on the interior and exterior self and its conflicts or acquiescence to the surrounding world. Spaces such as the kitchen, bedroom, and parlor possess a poignancy of mood, cluttered as they become with Pittman's numerous graphics. In the end it is the simultaneity of imagery that creates the power to move and enthrall the viewer. Lari Pittman has been awarded the J. Paul Getty Trust Fund for the Visual Arts Fellowship Grant in Painting, NEA Fellowship Grants in Painting and the Skowhegan Medal for Painting. His recent solo exhibitions include: ICA, London; Centre d'Art Contemporain, Geneva; Los Angeles County Museum of Art; Corcoran Museum, Washington DC; Contemporary Arts Museum, Houston; Villa Arson, Nice. Pittman lives and works in Los Angeles.

We are pleased to announce an exhibition of new work by Shirin Neshat. Continuing to use the culture of her native Iran as inspiration, her recent films attempt to reconstruct a more universal approach to notions of identity, society, refuge, and utopia. This exhibition will include a video installation from a larger ongoing project based on the novel Women Without Men by Shahrnush Parsipur. Tracing the lives of different women as they struggle to escape and form a refuge of their own in the midst of the 1953 CIA-led coup in Iran, the novel's surreal yet frank depiction of female sexuality and repression led to the author's own imprisonment and exile. The imagery that dominated Neshat's earlier work has given way to a more cinematic approach: eschewing the visual tropes of veil-covered women and white-shirted men, her new films forego neatly-parsed representations in favor of a stronger narrative course and more nuanced characterizations. Using the novel as a starting point, Neshat has adapted short films based on the five intertwined female characters. Elaborating upon the themes she has explored in both film and photography, her interpretation of the stories' magic realism blends strong visuals with the plot to create films that straddle both cinema and art. Still employing specifically articulated spaces and multi-channel screenings, Neshat's installation insists upon a visceral and emotional interaction between viewer and the plights of the characters she depicts. Zarin, 2005, is the story of a young woman who has been working as a prostitute since childhood. The film traces her slow disintegration into psychic delirium. Wracked by both guilt for her actions and a strong desire for salvation, her madness manifests itself in her perception of the world around her. Chronicling the course of her breakdown with imagery that is both graphic and beautiful, Neshat evokes the torment of one so tortured by her subjugated role in society that she feels completely powerless. As the men Zarin encounters appear without faces, horror, shame, and guilt overwhelm her. Viewing this as her punishment from God, she flees the brothel for a bathhouse. Scrubbing her skin raw and bloody, she attempts to make amends with her past; however, she descends deeper in madness as she strives for redemption. Shirin Neshat was born in Qazvin, Iran, but moved to the United States in 1974. She currently lives and works in New York. She has had solo exhibitions at the Museo de Arte Moderno, Mexico City; Contemporary Arts Museum, Houston; Walker Art Center, Minneapolis; Castello di Rivoli, Turin; Dallas Museum of Art; Wexner Center, Columbus; the Art Institute of Chicago; and the Serpentine Gallery, London. She has been included in Documenta XI, the 1999 Venice Biennale, and the 2000 Whitney Biennial. This past summer she was awarded the Hiroshima Freedom Prize and will be the subject of extensive retrospectives at Museo de Arte Contemporaneo in Leon, Spain and the Hamburger Bahnhof in Berlin this fall.

We are pleased to announce an exhibition of work by Paloma Varga Weisz, her first solo show in the United States. Trained as a woodcarver, Varga Weisz's work evokes the feeling of medieval tableaux, though her reinterpreted images from current press, literature, and famed works of art form a world of their own. The fanciful hybrids of animals, noblewomen, and plague-stricken men that people both her sculpture and works on paper are not merely charming; rather, they serve to activate a certain relish for the unknown that intrigues and captivates the viewer. Extracting the saintly faces and expressive drapery from the religious tendencies that have dominated the craft, Varga Weisz uses the techniques to create an abstracted personal vocabulary that relies on allusion to myth and history to map its course. Presented as an open-ended archeology of personal fantasy, these seemingly living installations perpetuate a sense of wonder while denying narrative impulse, prompting curator Jean-Christophe Amman to note that they have "much more to do with her observation of her emotions than with her emotions themselves." Her self-observation, though, mines a universal subconscious, analyzing the hybrids of imagination with a detached thoughtfulness. Cultivating the sense of a shared mythology to explain the surrounding world, Varga Weisz's sense of the imaginative is at once completely new but seemingly familiar. Through studying symptoms of religion, history, and folklore, the characters that populate her sculpture and works on paper foreground the necessity of personal and communal imaginative discourses. As Guido de Werd noted in an essay accompanying her exhibition at Museum Kurhaus Kleve, "the resultant scenes often seem fragmented, enigmatic, like pictures belonging to an unknown fairytale." For her latest work, "Chor," Varga Weisz investigates the tropes of ecclesiastical decoration using the vaguely Jungian archetypes of her own invention. Dismantling architectural aspects of a church choir and scattering them throughout a neutralized white cube, she has created an installation of sculpture and drawings that transform the gallery into a place of mystery and grace. From above a figure of knotted cloth and wood hangs: In a tangle of fabric sweeping almost to the floor, disjointed feet, hands, and face emerge from the folds, recalling both a victim of medieval execution, as well as an ethereal creature suspended between heaven and earth. Perhaps standing in judgment over this scene, the choir sits upon pew-like benches. These busts of multi-faced women and dog-headed men create a diverse community of imaginary figures, which together recall both the polyphony of Christian choirs and also the austere moralistic codes of the Greek theatrical chorus. Elsewhere four young girls sit in prayer, their faces finely carved out of raw blocks of wood that seem to permanently shroud them in wimple and habit. These young girls stand witness to the mystery as the viewer does—in humble awe of the possibly miraculous events that are unfolding, but never fully revealed. Paloma Varga Weisz was born in 1966 and raised in Neustadt an der Weinstrasse, Germany. After studying at the Kunstacademie Düsseldorf, she has continued to live and work there. She had a solo exhibition at the Museum Kurhaus Kleve and has been included in numerous group exhibitions at the Hamburger Bahnhof, Berlin, and the Kunstverein Düsseldorf, as well as in the permanent collection of K21. She was recently included in the 2005 Venice Biennale as a part of Rosa Martinez's exhibition "Always a Little Further." In 2006 she will participate in the Berlin Biennial, curated by Maurizio Cattelan, Massimiliano Gioni and Ali Subotnik. A fully illustrated catalogue will accompany the exhibition.

We are pleased to announce "Bridge Freezes Before Road" a group exhibition curated by Neville Wakefield. For his view of emerging trends in international art, Wakefield takes a road sign and poses it as a tabloid headline. It is the story of accidents waiting to happen. Marking paths of terrestrial migration, it warns of the perils of narrative, the dangers of elevation, the skid and slide of the unforeseen journey. Combining painting, sculpture, installation, and video, the works on view showcase a roster of new and familiar voices in all media, including Lali Chetwynd, Banks Violette, Martin Kippenberger, Dan Colen, and others. Surface as fetish, craft as obsession, the artists here, though disparate, relish in the degradation of the known and the perversion of the easy commodity. Assembled in this show are works that span divides of generation and media. Some engage in the general terms and conditions of specific ideas. For Adam McEwen, the urban landscape is a map of fractured text. Aaron Young literally kicks the picturesque to the death, not of the author, but of the camera. Slater Bradley plays John Bonham to the beat of a different drum, a different era, a different stadium. Chris Burden and John Dogg bow to artless skill and its mastery of craft through obsession alone. Narratives frozen in time are also to be found in states of decay, foundering as it were, on the roadside of progress. Clive Barkers dartboard is the sign of a target that signals only its own ineffectuality just as Robert Smithson's 'take' on the Nevada landscape leaves everything behind. While possibly confronting globalism and capitalism, many of these works take the face-value of surface for what it may not seem: beneath the fetish of commodity is a mythology recalling perversions of both intellectualism and low-brow culture. From Scott King's graphic collapse to Anne Collier's and John McCracken's interventions, these works muddle in the unknown on the broken stilts of the accepted. It's not the beach but the green men from outer space, not the better woman behind the great man, but how her hair falls out of place. "Bridge Freezes before Road" is a landscape of broken connections. Signposting the way are images and objects—bullets and cannonballs, gnomes and militia, hugs and drugs—an entropic trail of the living and the dead. A fully-illustrated catalogue with an essay by Wakefield will accompany the exhibition.

We are pleased to present an exhibition by Richard Prince. Following his critically lauded "Women" and "Man" shows, Prince will show a selection of new and old works, including painting, photography and sculpture, spanning the last twenty-five years of his career. A master chronicler of American culture, Richard Prince's art foregrounds the desires inherent in lifestyle consumption, at every point on the spectrum. He is the ultimate undergrounder, keenly observing and mapping the terrain so coolly that his work is almost never what it seems. The unfolding that results penetrates our consciousness as a sleight of hand, so that Marlboro ads look like "cowboys" and the landscape of upstate New York looks like Prince's "inside world." Richard Prince first gained critical attention in the early 1980s. His re-photographs of magazine advertisements redefined the autonomies of authorship and ownership and the very nature of representation. His redrawn "New Yorker" cartoons questioned the disparities between word and image, leading to an emphasis on text in which jokes, the substrata of a collective unconscious, became subject matter and an avenue for exploring the nature of painting. His hood paintings and sculptures bore pristine finishes and looked sent away for, with no trace of the artist's hand. The photographs from the last decade have taken a different turn, representing the landscape of Upstate New York. In addition, Prince's series of "publicity" photographs have honed in on the nature of collecting, including canceled checks and his own writings collaged with inscribed celebrity photographs. This series anticipated the most recent series of "check" paintings, in which canceled checks layer the canvas and the signature is brought front and center. Richard Prince has been curating exhibitions of his own work throughout his career, beginning with his Spiritual America Gallery in 1983 and culminating in the projects First House in 1993 and Second House, completed in 2003. "The thing is I really don't see art. For me it's there everyday. It's a world, an inside world. And I like a world I can go in and out of when I'm done." A 244 page artist's book relating to Second House will accompany the exhibition. Richard Prince was born in 1949 in the Panama Canal Zone and lives and works in Upstate New York. His work has been the subject of numerous one-person museum exhibitions, including the Whitney Museum of American Art in New York, the San Francisco Museum of Modern Art and Museum Boijmans van Beuningen in Rotterdam; the Museum für Gegenwartskunst in Basel, Kunsthalle Zurich and Kunstmuseum Wolfsburg. He will have an exhibition at the Whitechapel Art Gallery in London in September 2005.

We are pleased to announce an exhibition of new work by Magnus von Plessen, his first gallery show in the United States. In recent years his paintings have garnered an international reputation through numerous solo museum shows and inclusion in group exhibitions throughout the world. His paintings, stark yet evocative, rely upon a unique vocabulary of abstraction to mediate the surrounding world. The new works exhibited here further explore his manner of using the formal properties of color, line, and paint itself to come close to the subjective nature of perception. Intrigued by the evocations, feelings, and tangential thoughts the surrounding world provokes, von Plessen searches for the "inner image", an image that mirrors the activity of the mind. His stream-of-consciousness style of figuration compels his at times banal subjects into an authentic presence. As critic Jennifer Higgie notes in her essay accompanying this exhibition, "Even when Magnus von Plessen paints a picture of a man alone in a room the effect is less one of stillness than as if the image had paused in the midst of wrestling with the possibilities of its own representation." The treatment of the brushstroke upon the surface of the canvas reflects the multiplicity of perceiving the outside world: The individuated strokes of paint, applied in layers and thinned away, both accentuate and deny the ability of painting to capture reality. At once affirming paint as object and a painting as construction to perceive the outside world, the abstracted linear quality of the brushstroke obfuscates concrete figuration in favor of splitting open what is seen in order to reveal the varied ways it could be seen. As von Plessen said, his works mine the "divide between the materiality, the brushstroke, pigment and canvas, and the picture, the figure, the chair, and space, i.e. between the physical and the envisaged world I am painting." In Allergie (Allergy), 2004, a Gordian knot of choppy lines in colors ranging from mildewed blues and greens to electric reds and yellows, the view of a guitar player that eventually breaks through still falls short of figurative resolve and cohesion. Instead, a tension, even beyond that of the abstracted lines of scraped brushstrokes that both build and dismantle the scene, intrigues the viewer: Three discordant clouds of white, the titular allergies, intrigue the viewer while still prohibiting the him from fully solving the riddle of the scene. In a series of work using imagery of a rider on horseback, he uses alternately monochromatic and vibrant palettes to recall both exuberance and enervation. Just as von Plessen moves between abstraction and figuration, the varied views of a similar subject matter examine his interest in representing the inclusive, oft contradictory, reactions of the psyche. The pairing of von Plessen's treatment of the painted surface and the ambiguity of his compositions highlight the concept of his work: As Higgie wrote "the subject of the painting…is simultaneously spot lit and subsumed into the greater subject of the possibilities of pigment on a surface; a space, quite simply, where the imagination is made physical: a place where the eye never stops and the mind never stills." Magnus von Plessen was born in 1967 in Hamburg, Germany. His paintings have been the subject of numerous solo exhibitions at the Neues Kunstmuseum in Luzern, K21 Kunstsammlung Nordrhein-Westfalen in Düsseldorf, P.S. 1 in New York, and the Centre Pompidou in Paris. A forthcoming survey of his work curated by James Rondeau will be exhibited at the Art Institute of Chicago in June. His work was also included in the fiftieth Venice Biennale in 2003. This exhibition is accompanied by a fully-illustrated catalogue with a text by Jennifer Higgie.

We are pleased to announce an exhibition of new work by Sarah Lucas. Initially heralded amongst her peers in the 1990s as a key member of the movement of Young British Artists, she has developed a signature style addressing the raunchy underbelly of pop culture and gender dynamics. Using self-portraiture, found-object constructions, and collage, Lucas confronts the alternately grotesque and absurd euphemistic associations with the body and sex, humorously breaking down the camouflage of Puritanism, political correctness, and sexism from which these negative abstractions arise. Mixing commonplace household items such as wire hangers, stockings, and buckets with the detritus of tabloid clippings and advertising fliers, Lucas creates makeshift sculpture that slyly deconstructs assumed linguistic and gender codes. While seemingly simple, if not crude, her arrangements of objects, be they fruit or fluorescent tubing, posses a sophistication in their method of recalling complex socio-sexual relationships while referencing art historical antecedents such as Surrealism, Arte Povera, and Minimalism. The bawdy tone consistent in both her sculpture and self-portraiture fights fire with fire, confronting the misogynistic tendencies of contemporary British culture. A careful balance of the blatant and the subtle, she ties lewd clichés and desultory slang to sculpture while exposing its linguistic meaninglessness. The pairing of humor, as evidenced in the titles of her work, and the rough-hewn aesthetic she favors not only matches in vulgarity the sexism she attacks, but serves to deflate the offense by holding a mirror to it. For this exhibition, Lucas incorporates a pared-down vocabulary to create taut and thoughtful works meditating on themes that have always held her interest: the double bind faced by contemporary women, the messy intricacies of sex and love, and the rickety concepts of domesticity and religion. Using Victorian bed frames, stockings, and bald light bulbs, she evokes the untidiness of the body, the futility of the conventions used to frame and control it, and in the end, the pessimism that notions of monogamy and life-long commitment stir up in the contemporary mind. Because of the light touch Lucas applies through humor, the responses these evoke are never so cut and dried: By towing the lines of vulgarity and thoughtfulness her sculptures provoke questions about the mediation of base humanity in society, as much as they try to resolve the inherently tangled subjects she queries. Born in London in 1962, Sarah Lucas studied at Goldsmiths College and became an integral part of the YBA movement. Since her inclusion in the seminal exhibition Freeze, in London in 1988, she has been exhibited internationally including solo exhibitions at the Museum of Modern Art, New York in 1993; the Museum Boymans-van Beuningen in Rotterdam; and Portikus, Frankfurt during 1996. She has also been included in numerous group shows and surveys such as Brilliant at the Walker Art Center, Minneapolis in 1995 and Sensation: Young British Artists in the Saatchi Collection at the Royal Academy of Art in London and the Brooklyn Museum of Art in 1997. In 2004, along with friends and fellow artists Angus Fairhurst and Damien Hirst, Lucas collaborated for the exhibition "Ina-Gadda-Da-Vida" at Tate Britain. "God is Dad" will be accompanied by a fully illustrated catalogue with an essay by art historian Linda Nochlin.

We are pleased to announce its first exhibition of work by Bruce Conner. Vanguard artist and filmmaker, Conner has been at the forefront of many artistic movements since the 1960s. First earning acclaim for his assemblages and short films, such as the seminal A MOVIE, his forays into various modes of visual expression critique mass consciousness through dismantling the structures in which it is viewed. The density of his work, whether created through meticulous mark-making, the combination of disparate found objects, or fast-paced edits of stock film footage, strive to stimulate the eye in hopes of exposing both the ties and the frays inherent in our social fabric. In 1978, Conner, long a figure in the avant-garde and bohemian subcultures that burgeoned in the San Francisco Bay Area, documented the nascent California punk scene that rallied around the area club Mabuhay Gardens. His strong ties to the growing punk movement of the time allowed him to photograph the tight-knit group of bands, fans, and other personalities from the vantage point of an insider, capturing the raucous behavior and exuberant performances that spilled off the stage nightly. Frank and humorous, these images frame the comings and goings of the regulars of the club, such as Toni Basil, Devo, and Negative Trend, in tightly composed shots whose seemingly easy feel belie their visual complexity. The images of flying guitars, rioting fans, and the camaraderie built during late hours in smoky barrooms avoid now-nostalgic overtones through Conner's formal mastery and anarchic touch. Though a selection were first published in Search and Destroy, the famed punk 'zine, Conner organized the 53 photographs into two series which will be shown together for the first time. LUKE, a new film by Conner that premiered at the New York Film Festival in October 2004, will be screened at the gallery throughout the exhibition. The film recounts one day during the production of the 1967 film Cool Hand Luke. Invited to visit the set by his friend Dennis Hopper, Conner's film captures the events occurring on both sides of the camera. Though the focus of the day's shoot is a posse of shirtless actors shoveling gravel, including Paul Newman, George Kennedy, and Hopper, Conner's behind-the-scenes view emphasizes the filming as much as what is being filmed. As the crew mills about, dragging various equipment back and forth, the production of the film becomes a parade. Teasing out the relationship between still photography and motion picture, Conner has slowed the film speed during transfer from 8mm to digital video, creating images that are alternately staccato and attenuated. This poetic film, which meditates on both the formal features of film as well as its cultural role, features an original score both composed and performed by Patrick Gleeson. Bruce Conner was born in 1933 in McPherson, Kansas, and studied at the University of Nebraska and Brooklyn Museum Art School. Since the 1960s, his sculpture, films, drawing, and collages have been the subject of many solo exhibitions, including "2000 BC The Bruce Conner Story Part II," which was organized by the Walker Art Center in Minneapolis and traveled to the Modern Art Museum of Ft. Worth; the M.H. de Young Memorial Museum, San Francisco; and the Museum of Contemporary Art, Los Angeles. His work has been exhibited at numerous venues including the Whitney Museum of American Art; San Francisco Museum of Modern Art; the Museum of Contemporary Art Chicago; the Centre Georges Pompidou, Paris; and the Fondation Cartier, Paris.

We are pleased to announce its first exhibition of new work by Carroll Dunham. Dunham's canvases consume and spit out aspects of Abstract Expressionism, Pop, Surrealism, and even graffiti to build tautly painted, sexually and psychologically charged personal narratives and reflections. The early works, painted on wood veneer, used the existing textures of the knotted grain to create elaborate compositions recalling both fantastic organic forms and the popular imagery of cartoons. Dunham's psychedelic eruptions of inchoate sexual organs and primordial secretions moved gradually into toothy blobs of caricatured men and women. Soon dick-faced men and loamy hags inhabited pockmarked landscapes and even entire planets, as Dunham's abstractions became quasi-figural tableaux. In these new series of paintings, Dunham has reworked one particular recurring character from his ongoing painted narratives, that of the roaming man, perhaps an alter-ego, sometimes seen walking in black and white landscapes, at other times aiming guns and shooting blanks. While the figuration of his sooty hat, crumpled shirt and coat, and barred teeth remains consistent with earlier renderings, the man is now broken. Dunham narrowed his focus to fill the canvas with the particular details—just the tip of a nose, or a collar and lapel. His once easily recognizable figure now exists in abstracted compositions, expanding into fields of roughly textured paint and expressive, gestural line. Works of all sizes, some stretching over two canvases, dissect the figure and twist the perspective to create a jumbled spray of different vantages that seemingly connect into a single visage of Dunham's caricature; however, the pieces just don't fit. Though the paint now bleeds and the man is not as secure, the work remains true to Klaus Kertess's assessment of Dunham's previous work: "Rude, sometimes lurid, often grotesquely humorous in a Boschian Garden-of- Earthly-Delights kind of way, rich in metaphor, this art's squirmy psychosexuality is embraced by visual, formal acuity." While women once figured more prominently in Dunham's fables, he has turned in recent years to exploring femininity in sculpture. Like drawing in three dimensions, he has been outlining elaborate forms in sheets of flat metal, painted black like shadows of some alien female presences. In his new series of sculptures, he reworked these silhouettes, bending and twisting the figures. With each turn of the viewer's eye, these works seem to morph, grow, and evolve, though they never seem to become fully solid. However long each changing view is studied, it is as if shadow continually obscures the true appearance of these crones. Like specimens, this band of creatures is both menacing in figure, yet constrained on bases recalling operating tables—like an unknown species captured, yet still not seen. This paring of masculine and feminine, between the boys always on display and the girls perpetually in the shadows highlights the tension at the heart of Dunham's loose figuration. The grotesque and abstracted hordes of men and women appearing in the paintings and sculptures mirror the psychological undercurrent pinning down the morass of sex and gender which has continually kept the complexities of Dunham's work from fully crossing the stile between abstraction to figuration. Joining these different groups, though, does not resolve two halves into a whole, but furthers the inquiry into the relationship between Dunham's formal technique and imagery. As Molly Nesbit says in her essay that accompanies the exhibition catalogue, "One would hesitate to call this 'it' paradise regained. /One should not." Carroll Dunham was born in 1949 and currently lives and works in New York and Connecticut. He has been the subject of one- person exhibitions, including exhibitions at Guild Hall, East Hampton, Forum for Contemporary Art, St. Louis, and a mid-career retrospective at the New Museum in New York in 2002. His work has been included in numerous Whitney Biennials and is currently on view as part of "Disparities and Deformations: Out Grotesque," SITE Santa Fe's fifth biennial curated by Robert Storr. A fully illustrated catalogue with texts by Molly Nesbit is available.

Barbara We are pleased to announce "Neither," an exhibition of new work by Miroslaw Balka. Born in 1958 in Warsaw, Poland, notions of history and the residue of memory weigh heavily in Balka's approach to sculpture. Growing up in Catholic Poland under a Socialist regime where Western popular icons were rejected, the artist recalls that his childhood heroes were saints and martyrs. The grandson of a funerary-monument sculptor, and the son of a master masonry craftsman, Balka has said that sculpture is "in the blood." These religious and familial traditions lend his work a pervading sense of sacredness, a somber view of history and the individual's relationship to it. His poetic works, recalling the tragedies of Western European history such as the Holocaust, memorialize events through symbolic abstraction rather than discrete monument. Balka's craft, imbued with a familial lineage, relies upon the well-worn objects of human use and the traces left by the body, such as blood and tears, evoking the burdened emotions that lie beyond the easily parsed dates and facts of the past. These artifacts of memory and forgetfulness, presence and absence, meditate on what history leaves behind—the psychic repercussions alluded to in abstracted object—and ties it to the body and the memory of those living in the present. In the four new works presented in this show, Balka explores the individual's relationship to tragedy through his evocative use of video projection and rough-hewn sculpture. Balka's abstracted installations attempt to reify the absence of memory that swarms around historical tragedy. Noting that many turn a blind eye to tragedy, the pieces in this exhibition act as an exorcism revealing not only the trauma of the past, but also the cold passage to resuscitating its memory. Inverting his usual practice of highlighting bodily absence, the viewers confronted by these projected images and sculptures fill the void left by forgetfulness and must face these ruptures inflicted upon the psyche, the home, and the world that have received a blank stare for so long. Winterreise, a work of 2003 included in this show, embodies Balka's method of capturing these haunting aspects of the past and reframes them to highlight the contrast of what happened and what memory reveals. Three projections show different views of the Brzezinka Concentration Camp, as it currently stands, wrapped in the lull of winter snow. Unaware that the landscape shown was a location of such incomprehensible tragedy, the viewer sees the wintry images of the barracks and the nearby pond, where ashes of victims were disposed of, free of historical context, and as Balka says, "almost like postcards." Another view of the camp shows two young does scampering about the old barbed wire fences, recalling Bambi, the animated film released by Disney in 1942, the year Hitler began his infamous pogrom. By veiling these shots in hopeful banality with allusions to the easily digestible tragedies that populate commercial cinema, Balka reveals to the viewer how readily the world can turn away from tragedy and repress horrific memories. Miroslaw Balka's work has been the subject of many one-person exhibitions internationally, including the Kroller-Muller Museum, Otterlo; Stedelijk Museum voor Actuele Kunst in Ghent; National Museum of Art, Osaka; Museet for Samtidskunst, Oslo; IVAM, Centre Del Carme, Valencia; Kunsthalle Bielefeld; Centre d'art contemporain, Thiers; Tate Gallery, London; Van Abbemuseum, Eindhoven; Museum Haus Lange, Krefeld; and Renaissance Society at the University of Chicago. The artist was the representative of Poland at the 1993 Venice Biennale. Miroslaw Balka lives and works in Warsaw.

Barbara We are pleased to announce an exhibition of new work by London-based artist Anish Kapoor. Intimate yet grand, the immediacy of Kapoor's large-scale sculptural works is often said to evoke the sublime. For Kapoor, however, it is the act of viewing, rather than the material, that consummates the work. Kapoor's materiality is concerned with, in his words, "…issues that lie below the material, with the fact that materials are there to make something else possible… the non-physical things, the intellectual things, the possibilities that are available through the material." In this new body of work, Kapoor further explores the illusions of materials and surfaces, articulating his established dialogue between form and void, dynamic and static. This investigation began in the 1980s when Kapoor created abstract forms with powdered pigment, giving the forms undulating, aura-like contours while maintaining a sense of solidity. Though his materials began to vary, with the use of alabaster, fiberglass, stainless steel and so forth, his subsequent "void" sculptures underlined the negative space, a site of both terror and longing, as an "experience that is outside of material concern," as Kapoor put it. Confronted with the sublime or the uncanny in such exacting works, the viewer is drawn into Kapoor's spell, an illusion of material and color that eclipses the tension between form and emotion. In this exhibition, Kapoor expands upon his practice, using new treatments for materials to create innovative forms, including a new large-scale stainless steel piece accompanied by other new works, that will transform and reactivate the gallery space. Expanding upon the familiar, while introducing new methods of figuration, these works build upon his signature style while teasing out new directions for Kapoor's formal investigations. Recently, Kapoor has stretched the limits of his craft with several monumental sculptures whose materiality and sense of scale not only create new positions for the viewer's gaze to engage the work, but also manipulate and recontextualize space. Marsyas, his work commissioned for Turbine Hall at the Tate Modern, Taratantara, (Naples, 2000), and his commission for the Millennium Park in Chicago all elaborate on Kapoor's signature use of vibrant color, dynamic material, and organic forms to dominate, astonish, and redefine the relationship between object and viewer, sculpture and space. In this way, Kapoor's gargantuan proportions and sublime forms become, as Homi Bhabha wrote, a "living tissue, a contingent and relational medium," binding viewers together in the experience of his sculpture, which encompasses the awe and grandeur of humanity. Anish Kapoor, born in 1954 in Bombay, India, has lived and worked in London since 1973. Solo exhibitions include Baltic Center for Contemporary Art, Gateshead; CAPC Musée d'art contemporain de Bordeaux; Centro Galego de Arte Contemporanea, Santiago de Compostela; Hayward Gallery, London; Schirn Kunsthalle, Frankfurt; Fondazione Prada, Milan; DePont Foundation, Tilburg; Kunsthaus Bregenz; and Museo Archeologico Nazionale, Naples. In 1990 he was awarded the Premio Duemila for representing Great Britain at the Venice Biennale, and received the Turner Prize in 1991. Recently commissioned to create the memorial in New York City for British victims of September 11, it is his second major permanent public work in the United States, joining the project for Chicago's Millennium Park, the city's largest public sculpture, slated for summer 2004. A fully illustrated catalogue, published by Edizioni Charta, with an essay by Anthony Vidler will accompany this exhibition.

Barbara We are pleased to announce an exhibition based upon the archives of Vito Acconci, his first show with the gallery in six years. For the first time, Vito Acconci will exhibit never-before-seen selections of his archive from the years 1969 through 1973, the period in which he created landmark body works such as Trade Marks, Seed Bed, and Following Piece. The original project descriptions, notes, and related materials trace the development of the almost three hundred projects, performances, actions, films, and installations created during this period from concept to finished action or object, allowing even those already familiar with the work a direct insight into the thinking behind these seminal works. In 1969, Vito Acconci's practice gradually turned from poetry to action and photo-based conceptual pieces. Using himself and the space around him, these works sought to examine the surrounding social and physical dynamics, mining the implications of the singular, personal body in action. Whether trailing an unsuspecting New Yorker throughout a day's journey or documenting the growth of sores on his forearm caused by his continual rubbing, the true locus of the investigation was always the body: stalking as bodily violation of social code; wounding as harness for physical mutability. Adding the mediums of video and installation, Acconci preferenced the actions of the body, from simple movements such as jumping and falling to more complex feats of rigorous athletics, as the prime method to explore, record, and dismantle preconceptions not only of the work of art, but social interaction. From his days as a poet, through his performance and installation work in the late sixties and seventies, the page has been an important space for Vito Acconci, a nexus where thoughts written in concrete space have possibility as bodily actions. In a unique and personal voice reflecting his charismatic diction, the multiple drafts of notes and descriptions that will be exhibited for each project not only reveal Acconci's foregrounding thoughts, but also show the evolution of his artistic motivations to explore his body, the space around it, and the binds on its potential energy. A catalogue designed by the artist will be published by Charta and includes Acconci's complete body of project notes, descriptions, and materials related to the work of this period. Vito Acconci has been the subject of numerous one-person exhibitions, including those at the Museum of Modern Art, New York; the Museum of Contemporary Art, Chicago, and the Whitney Museum of American Art. His work will also be the subject of a forthcoming retrospective organized by the Museu d'Art Contemporani de Barcelona, opening this summer at the Musée des Beaux-Art de Nantes before continuing to Spain and additional venues. Acconci Studio was the subject of the exhibition "Acts of Architecture," organized by the Museum of Contemporary Art, Houston, and traveled to the Milwaukee Art Museum, Aspen Art Museum and Miami Art Museum. This summer the studio opened the acclaimed public space Island in the Mur in Graz, Austria. Vito Acconci was born in 1940 and lives and works in New York.

Barbara We are pleased to present an exhibition of works by Alighiero Boetti. Over the course of his career, Alighiero Boetti gave increasing importance to the creative concept, the investigation of culture and society through the idea. Boetti was born in Turin in 1940 and by 1966 had become associated with a group of artists whose groundbreaking work Germano Celant would feature in his exhibition "Arte Povera" in 1967. Through the use of everyday materials, the Arte Povera aesthetic sought an immediate connection with real life. These artists shared an intense interest in destabilizing the dominant structures behind the "false" realities of consumer-capitalism. In keeping with his political philosophy, Boetti renamed himself Alighiero e Boetti to expose the underlying structure present in one's own identity as expressed in the dual nature of the self and the name. He said: "While a name is unique, a surname is already a category, a means of classification . . ." Bipolarities permeate Boetti's thought: part and whole; half and double; full and empty; order and disorder; addition and subtraction; Alighiero and Boetti. Boetti sought throughout his career to uncover the duality of structure. This exhibition includes key works by Boetti that highlight the variety of media he employed and also disclose the consistency of his vision. Initially, Boetti's embroidered series of maps (Mappa) were conceptual works that called attention to global political crises and the growing tension between East and West. These embroidered tapestries were commissioned from weavers in Afghanistan and Pakistan between 1971 and 1994. Boetti would layout their designs – world maps, aphorisms, symbols – and the weavers would create the works. Over time the political message turned more historical and Boetti began to produce the maps in series, and thus began his transition from the unique work towards seriality. Numerical operations, also notably present throughout Boetti's oeuvre, can be seen in his fascination with numbers, progression and mathematics, which are thematized in Opera Postale (Postal Work). In this work, executed in 1980, Boetti created his own unique order system based on possible combinations of numbers. This culminated in eight groups of envelopes and their contents, which were all sent to the same address. The number of letters in each distinct group grows exponentially. An important Copertina from 1986 employs seriality and progression via traced magazine covers, one for each month of the year. The juxtapositon of the political and the popular news connect the viewer with contemporary events that uncannily repeat themselves. Mappa, Copertina and Opera Postale reveal Boetti's political concerns and his belief in the contingency of both history and the individual viewer. In these works, as throughout Boetti's oeuvre, the viewer is an essential part in the completion of the work. For Boetti, "…once the basic idea has emerged, the concept, the rest is not a matter of choice..." Alighiero Boetti's solo exhibitions include: Stedelijk Van Abbemuseum, Eindhoven; The Venice Biennale; Kunstverein Münster; Centre National d'Art Contemporain, Grenoble; Museum of Contemporary Art, Los Angeles; DIA Center for the Arts, New York; The Institute for Contemporary Art P.S.1 Museum, New York; Galleria Civica d'Arte Moderna e Contemporanea, Turin; Galleria Nazionale d'Arte Moderna, Rome; Museum für Moderne Kunst, Frankfurt; and Whitechapel Art Gallery, London. Alighiero e Boetti died in 1994. A catalogue, published by Charta, with an essay by Rolf Lauter will accompany the exhibition.

Barbara We are pleased to announce an exhibition of new drawings by Marisa Merz. Marisa Merz's expressive yet tranquil drawings reveal a deeply personal world teeming with intricate mazes of figures and signs. Her gestures subtly inhabit distinct spaces, as the delicately drawn portraits seem to emerge from a smoky, sumptuous field. Though these portraits maintain an­­ air of intimacy, the underlying themes associated with the Arte Povera movement nevertheless continue to inform her work. The Italian movement, which formed in 1967 and counts Merz and her late husband Mario Merz as founding members, called into question established ideas and assumptions about the processes and materials that had come to define Western art. Though the name has no literal translation, it can be roughly interpreted as "impoverished art," and Merz, along with the other innovative, seminal artists associated with Arte Povera, began using everyday and organic materials in an effort to subvert the elite status that the art object had attained in its role in the consumerism-based culture of advanced capitalism. Merz's attention to sinuous, organic forms, her focus on subjectivity, and the way in which her work negotiates 'low' types of art such as craft underline her position on the relationship between art and life. "There has never been any division between my life and my work," she has said. Merz advanced this critical framework by drawing on traditional customs associated with female domesticity. Thus she began knitting and the idea of home as a feminine space, a private, intimate realm became central to her work. Merz's 1966 work Untitled (Living Sculpture) was comprised of thin strips of aluminum that weaved and swirled throughout space and was made for a gallery installation as well as her own home. This lead to Merz's construction of metal threads woven like clothing, capable of fitting parts of the body. Passionate though calm, her personal investigations continue today in her delicate portrait drawings. Marisa Merz was born in 1931 in Turin, Italy. She continues to live in and work in both Turin and Milan. Merz's solo exhibitions include the Museé National d'Art Moderne Centre Georges Pompidou, Paris; the Stedelijk Museum, Amsterdam; the Kunstmuseum Winterthur, Switzerland; and the Villa delle Rose, Galleria d'Arte Moderna, Bologna. Selected group exhibitions include the Guggenheim Museum, New York, "The Italian Metamorphosis,1943-1968"; Kunstmuseum Wolfsburg, "Die italienische Metamorphose, 1943-1968"; Hamburger Bahnhof, Berlin, "Zeitlos"; the 1988 Biennale di Venice; P.S.1., New York, "The KNOT Arte Povera at P.S.1"; Kunsthaus Zürich, Zürich, "Spuren, Skulpturen, und Monumente ihrer praezisen Reise"; and "Documenta 7", Kassel.

Barbara We are pleased to present new work by the German artist Gregor Schneider. Schneider is most known for his captivatingly obsessive Totes (Dead) Haus u r, which he began working on in 1985 at the age of sixteen. Compulsively reconstructed, altered, distorted, built and rebuilt, the Haus has been transported all over the world, most notably occupying the German Pavilion at the 49th Venice Biennale in 2001, for which Schneider won the Golden Lion prize. Once an ordinary home in Rheydt, Germany, the ever-changing Haus has now been transformed in innumerable ways. Rooms have been built within rooms, walls have been raised in front of walls, exits have been obscured, doors and windows have been blocked and hidden while others have been created or revealed in their place. Adding to the confusion, even the air that moves and the sunlight that seems to trickle in from the outside are merely illusions as their sources lie in ventilators and hidden lights. Today, Schneider himself is hard-pressed to locate the original elements of the structure. Along with his Totes Haus u r, Schneider's body of work is also comprised of sculptures, photographs, drawings, and video. In his first solo exhibition in New York, Schneider will draw on these sources to create sculptural and architectural tensions within the space of the gallery, exposing unexpected, often uncanny, foundations and meanings. Through Schneider's often-elaborate process of creation, banal spaces become mysteriously capable of an illusory disorientation. Therein, Schneider's sculptural environment envelops the viewer in an utterly enigmatic space with its overwhelming materiality and subtle visible and invisible shifts. As Schneider himself states, ". . . even the work becomes forgettable. As soon as you have built a stone into a wall . . . after a while you don't know where it is anymore, and the same thing happens again and again. It's like that with a wall and exactly the same with a room. As soon as someone spends any time in a room, you accept it as a normal room." The Haus will be on view concurrently at the Los Angeles Museum of Contemporary Art. A fully illustrated monograph, designed by the artist with an essay by Paul Schimmel, will accompany the exhibitions. This will be the first monograph on Schneider published in English. Gregor Schneider was born in 1969 in Rheydt, Germany where he continues to live and work. In addition to the exhibition at the Los Angeles Museum of Contemporary Art, Schneider's other solo exhibitions include the Hamburger Kunsthalle (2003); Museum für Gegenwartkunst, Siegen; the 49th Biennale di Venezia (German Pavilion), Aarhus Kunst Museum, Denmark; Musée d´Art Moderne de la Ville de Paris; Museum Abteiberg, Mönchengladbach; Kunsthalle Frankfurt am Main; and the Kunsthalle Bern. Selected group exhibitions include the New Museum of Contemporary Art, New York; Site Santa Fe; Moderna Museet, Stockholm; and the Carnegie International.

Richard Prince: Nurse Paintings September 20 – October 25, 2003 Barbara We are pleased to announce an exhibition of new paintings by Richard Prince. Never before seen in the U.S., Prince's "Nurse" paintings reflect his distinctive approach to popular culture. An avid book collector, Prince appropriates covers of pulp novels that present the iconic white-uniformed Nurse and then applies layer upon layer of rich, brilliant hues to his printed canvases. The paint acts both to obscure and reveal the images lying beneath as Prince, through a film of paint, consciously allows traces of background to emerge in ghost-like forms while the Nurses themselves and their corresponding titles are left visible. Through his repetition and reworking of the Nurse novel covers Prince plays upon the anonymity of the figures and the inevitably unstable issues of identity, authenticity and authorship. Prince's painterly brushstrokes, drips and splatters that pervade the canvas and shroud the Nurses also evoke the era of the pulp novel, the era of Abstract Expressionism. Thus, Prince allows us to reconsider the post-war aesthetic through the codes of mass culture as unearthed for us by the keen eye of an ardent bibliophile. The Nurses partake in Prince's game of irony as the intense colors and near theatrical play of light reveal them to be seductresses of a hypnotically fictional world. One increasingly becomes aware of the sneaking suspicion that something sinister lies within these emblems of caring and nurturing. Richard Prince was born in 1949 and lives and works in upstate New York. A retrospective of Prince's paintings and photographs was held in 2002 at the Kunstmuseum Wolfsburg, which conjoined the previous exhibition of paintings at Kunsthalle Zurich and photographs at Museum für Gegenwartskunst Basel. Other solo exhibitions include: MAK Center for Art and Architecture, Schindler House, Los Angeles; MAK Vienna; Kestner Gesellschaft, Hannover; Museum Boymans-van Beuningen, Rotterdam; San Francisco Museum of Modern Art; Kunstverein and Kunsthalle, Dusseldorf; IVAM Centre del Carme, Valencia; and the Whitney Museum of American Art, New York. A fully illustrated catalogue designed by the artist with an essay by Michael Collings will accompany the exhibition.

Barbara We are pleased to announce an exhibition of new work by French photographer Jean-Luc Mylayne. Mylayne's large format, color photographs are the result of his patient, even obsessive observations of wild birds in their natural habitats. His process involves spending months with his subjects, waiting for the moments in which their communal existence can be realized as a photographic composition. These intimate representations of birds lend themselves to a seemingly direct relationship between the observer and the observed, the artist and his subject. However, Mylayne's photographs are not so much portraits of individual birds as they are meditations on the concepts of knowledge and time that shape our existence. A self-taught photographer, Mylayne's practice is a very personal one that combines his passions for art and ornithology, while transcending that of a Naturalist. Although he would seem a modern-day John James Audubon, Mylayne's art does not represent the ideal of a species or limit itself to exoticism. Instead, his subjects are ordinary birds, the commonest of species that inhabit our backyards and countrysides. Mylayne's unremarkable birds are made heroic only in his intensely beautiful compositions that imply the observer's relationship to the observed with a quiet dignity. His attention to the beautiful within the ordinary conjures an opening-up of the world of experiences, wondrously distilled in the photographic moment. Mylayne's art is achieved ". . . through an intense contemplation which, without transfixing us with weighty insistence, has found a way to extract, from colorless banality, the infinitesimal details of nameless existences and give them a definable significance." (Didier Arnaudet) Jean-Luc Mylayne was born in 1946 and lives in France. One-person exhibitions include the Photographers' Gallery, London; the ARC/Musée d'Art Moderne de la Ville de Paris; the Boca Raton Museum of Art, Boca Raton, FL; the Musée d'Art Moderne, St. Etienne; the Bibliotèque Nationale, Paris; and the Musée des Beaux-Arts, Calais.

Barbara We are pleased to announce an exhibition of new sculptures by the German artist Stephan Balkenhol. Balkenhol's work updates the practice of sculpture in the tradition of the three-dimensional representation of the human figure. His sculptures usually depict figures on pedestals that are carved from single blocks of wood and then hand-painted. Balkenhol has revised the tradition of heroic representation in sculpture by using wood (rather than marble or bronze) to create figures that are ordinary rather than idealized, and anonymous rather than heroic. His sculptures convey a universal humanism, as his figures are the familiar strangers that occupy our everyday lives, wearing ordinary clothing and introspective expressions. The timelessness and universality of the human condition that Balkenhol represents is further achieved by his process. With soft woods, like wawa and poplar, he uses a chainsaw to quickly hew the figure and pedestal from one block of wood. He then uses various tools for the details and finally paints the surface, except for the flesh of the figure which is left natural. Balkenhol's process is revealed by the marks of his chisel and the well-worked surface of the sculpture, leaving one with a sense of the spontaneity and vitality of the act of making. The resultant works come to acknowledge the ever-present complexities between the individual and the universal. Neal Benezra, Director of the San Francisco Museum of Modern Art, has stated: "At a time when all manner of political, social, and cultural dogma seems open to question, it may just be possible for Stephan Balkenhol to breathe new life into figurative sculpture." Stephan Balkenhol was born in Fritzlar/Hessen, Germany in 1957, and lives and works in Karlsrühe, Germany and Meisenthal, France. He has recently completed a permanent, site-specific work for the Shedd Aquarium in Chicago. He has been awarded the Karl-Schmidt-Rottluff Grant; the Baden-Württemberg International Prize; and the Bremen Art Prize. Recent solo exhibitions include: Forum for Contemporary Art, St. Louis; The Contemporary Arts Center, Cincinnati; David Winton Bell Gallery, Providence; Kunstmuseum Wolfsburg; the Von-der-Heydt Museum, Wuppertal-Elberfeld; The Arts Club of Chicago; The Montreal Museum of Fine Arts; the Centre Europeen d'Actions Artistiques Contemporaines, Strasbourg; and the Hirshhorn Museum and Sculpture Garden, Smithsonian Institution, Washington, DC.

Barbara We are pleased to present an exhibition of new work by Sharon Lockhart. The exhibition includes multiple-panel, large-scale color photographs that portray interactions between humans and the realist sculpture of Duane Hanson. A series of nineteen smaller-scale photographs and a 16mm film that were inspired by the radical form of Japanese flower arranging, NO-no Ikebana, will also be on view for the first time. Lockhart presents a monumental four-part photographic work that pays homage to Hanson's monumental sculpture Lunch Break (1989). The sculpture depicts three construction workers taking their lunch among the scaffolding and ladders from which they have descended, while the photographs depict two museum preparators installing the work. Lockhart's careful placement of the two men with the sculpture implies the delicate relationship among those who directly handle the artwork, opening a discourse on the idea of the worker: from the museum worker to the construction worker and full circle to the absent artist-worker. These complexities are manifest in the almost life-size photographs that depict the sculpture and its grand physicality from all four sides within the museum's white walls, evidencing the work behind-the-work that is often unseen. The photographs embrace the enormity of detail within the sculpture itself, which often goes unnoticed in the usually frontal presentation of the work while exhibited and represented in photographic illustration. A large-scale diptych, Maja and Elodie, depicts a woman interacting with Hanson's more intimate sculpture, Child with Puzzle from 1978. The sculpture represents a girl sitting on a rug making a jigsaw puzzle, which Lockhart photographs with the young woman sitting across from the sculpture. The woman tenderly looks down at the girl, simultaneously intimating a human relationship between them and the careful attention necessarily given to the sculpture itself. The two photographs are nearly identical except that a minor activity has taken place: in the second photograph the woman has lifted a piece of the puzzle from the rug, so that there is a slight shadow beneath it. A series of nineteen photographs divided among four groupings portrays the life cycle of a NO-no Ikebana arrangement of brussels sprouts. A radical form of the Japanese art of Ikebana flower arranging, the philosophy of NO-no Ikebana is one of agriculture, in which fruits and vegetables are selected directly from the farm and the life cycle of the arrangement is highly considered. For this series, Lockhart has photographed one arrangement multiple times a day on each of the 31 days of December. Her selections and consequent groupings portray the still life arrangement as a series of gestures, in which the plant itself slowly yellows and wilts against a smoky-green background. The film NO is presented on 16mm and depicts a husband and wife team of farmers working the land. As in her previous films, the fixed-frame of the camera shows daily activities that are carefully choreographed, here as the farmers enter the far ground of the field and slowly form piles of hay from side to side, moving their way toward the foreground. At this point they move backward again, slowly spreading the hay across the field. The result is a kind of real-time landscape painting, in which the costumes, lighting, colors of the landscape, actions of the farmers, and fixed view present an homage to agriculture from the other side of the practice of NO-no Ikebana. Sharon Lockhart was born in 1964 and lives and works in Los Angeles. Selected one-person exhibitions include: Museum Boijmans Van Beuningen Rotterdam, Kunsthalle Zurich, and Kunstmuseum Wolfsburg; Museum of Contemporary Art, Chicago and Museum of Contemporary Art, San Diego; Pitti Imagine Discovery, Florence; MAK-Austrian Museum of Applied Arts, Vienna; Kemper Museum of Contemporary Art and Design, Kansas City, MO; and Künsterhaus Stuttgart. Lockhart's films have been included in the New York Film Festival; Telluride International Experimental Cinema Exposition, Denver; Vienna International Film Festival; International Film Festival, Berlin; and the Sundance Film Festival, Park City, Utah.

Barbara We are pleased to announce an exhibition of sculptures by Carl Andre, Dan Flavin, Robert Gober, Donald Judd, Sol Lewitt, Richard Long, Mario Merz, Richard Serra and Robert Smithson. The exhibition begins in the early sixties with several works by Minimalist artists who saw in sculpture the possibility of cleansing art of all pretensions to illusionist representation, leaving only the self-evident and essential reality of the object. This exhibition includes a 198 square inch grid of flat aluminum squares by Carl Andre, in which he literally leveled sculpture to all but its most basic qualities of material and structure. A similar preoccupation with the basic physical properties of an industrial material can be seen in one of Richard Serra's earliest sculptures of a lead Bent Pipe Roll from 1968 Also included is Donald Judd's bullnose progression in galvanized iron from 1967. In Sol Lewitt's open cube based on a modular grid, the Minimalist aesthetic is adapted to express the artist's belief in the ultimate importance in art of the idea. The simplicity of form and material allows for nothing to detract the viewer's attention from the stark beauty of the generating idea. With his fluorescent light sculptures, Dan Flavin fused elementary forms with industrial materials. The work in this exhibition from 1967 belongs to his series of "monuments" to the Russian Constructivist Vladimir Tatlin. Here, the luminescent, towering construction of seven light tubes is a befitting homage to Tatlin's dedication to harmonizing art and science. Also included in this exhibition is a rarely exhibited work by Robert Smithson from 1973. This small but lively construction of twigs and corrugated cardboard suggests the dialectic between nature and culture as well as structural presence and natural disintegration. Mario Merz's Fibonacci Igloo from 1972, constructed of a metal frame, fabric blocks and neon lights, resonates with social commentary and metaphor. The final piece of this exhibition is one of Robert Gober's sinks, in which he has constructed the basic form of the object from plaster, wood, metal and paint and distorted it by stripping it bare of all its distinguishable functional features and inverting its form. In this way, the sink takes on new meaning as an object of expressive intrigue with strikingly Minimalist aesthetics.

Barbara We are pleased to announce an exhibition of Jan Dibbets' complete photographic archive from 1967 to the present. Comprising 250 contact sheets, the archives have never before been exhibited in the US and trace the evolution of Dibbets' work, from the early Perspective Corrections that analyze the nature of perception, to the Color Studies that invite the viewer to delight in the sensual pleasures of pure color and geometry. Born in the Netherlands in 1941, Dibbets was trained as a painter, but turned to the photographic medium in the late 1960s. The rich tradition of Dutch painting with its emphases on light, structure, and nature influenced Dibbets early on by way of artists like Mondrian, Saenredam, and Rembrandt. This led Dibbets to develop a painterly approach to photography, such that his compositions challenge traditional assumptions that the medium produces only objective reproductions of reality. Also like his predecessors, Dibbets chooses generic subjects such as landscapes, leaves and windows, highlighting their formal qualities rather than their iconographic values. In this exhibition, Dibbets affords his contact sheets an autonomous status equal to that of his final artworks. The contact sheets reveal the unedited whole of developed film, complete with edges of the negative and their numerical codes, articulating the artist's belief that for the camera, every moment is as important as the next. In the exhibition, several contact sheets depicting permutations of the same subject are grouped together in a single installation, like poetry describing a single motif. The works from Dibbets' structuralist period (1967-1974) demonstrate his interest in conceptualist thinking, along with optics and perception. In 1967 he began his series of Perspective Corrections in which he photographed a trapezoidal form laid on a lawn at a certain angle, such that the trapezoid appears to be a square on the surface of the photograph, thereby subverting the idea that the camera doesn't lie. In other photographs from this period, Dibbets developed a serial format in order to document the passage of time. Dibbets took photographs of a landscape horizon at different angles, so that each frame shows slight shifts in the ratio of land to sea. He also did a series of windows, photographing them at fixed intervals of time, so that all the gradations of light over the course of a day were captured on film. Since the early 1970s, Dibbets has photographed geometric patterns occurring in everyday objects, such as floor tiles, Venetian blinds, fallen leaves, and gently rippling water. The images are close views with little figure/ground relationship so that the compositions possess an allover quality and are alive with movement. In his Color Studies, close-up shots of car exteriors in a wide range of hues allow color to achieve autonomy in its pure visual effect. Jan Dibbets lives and works in Amsterdam. Recent solo exhibitions include: DePont Stichting voor Hedendaagse Kunst, Tilburg; and an installation of 32 stained-glass windows for the Cathédrale Saint-Louis, Blois. He has also had solo exhibitions at Stedelijk Van Abbemuseum, Eindhoven; Kunsthalle, Bern; Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, New York; Walker Art Center, Minneapolis; Detroit Institute of the Arts, Detroit; and Fundacion Espai Poblenau, Barcelona.

Richard Prince: Paintings May 11 - June 21, 2002 Barbara We are pleased to announce an exhibition of new paintings by Richard Prince. This body of work features handpainted jokes that are fractured, incomplete, repeated and layered, like the stuttering speech of an amateur comedian. Schematic figures and bold, abstract "cartoon" faces also populate many of the paintings, which range in length from five to nearly seventeen feet. Prince first incorporated jokes into his work in the mid-1980s when he redrew captioned cartoons from magazines. Since then, he has repeated and reworked the same jokes in multiple formats, from jokes that are handwritten on paper or canvas, to those that are silkscreened on smoothly-painted canvases, sans facteur. Through his recycling of anonymous jokes, Prince addresses the instability of core values such as identity, authenticity and authorship. In these new paintings, the jokes undergo a further permutation. Together with cartoon references such as smiling daisies, stick figures and black "cartoon" faces, texts of jokes run across large-scale canvases amid tactile, painterly drips and splatters, which may be read as a simultaneous homage to and send-up of Abstract Expressionism. Whereas in earlier works a single joke was the focus of a composition, here each painting contains several jokes, some of which are obscured to the point of illegibility under layers of paint or superimposed text. In some areas Prince splices texts from different jokes, revealing unexpected similarities resembling Freudian slips. Elsewhere, spelling and syntax errors confound our reading of the text, suggesting that something was lost during the process of relentlessly copying and recopying the jokes. Some jokes refer to Prince's earlier works, while others are new ones culled from the artist's vast archive. Although the jokes are derived from various sources, the abject humor of rejection and sexual taboo is ever-present. As curator Lisa Phillips has observed, "Jokes about infidelity figure especially prominently—perhaps as a metaphor for the infidelity of pictures," or in this case, words. Richard Prince was born in 1949 and lives and works in upstate New York. A retrospective of Prince's paintings and photographs is now on view at the Kunstmuseum Wolfsburg, which conjoins the previous exhibition of paintings at Kunsthalle Zurich and photographs at Museum für Gegenwartskunst Basel. Other solo exhibitions include: MAK Center for Art and Architecture, Schindler House, Los Angeles; MAK Vienna; Kestner Gesellschaft, Hannover; Museum Boymans-van Beuningen, Rotterdam; San Francisco Museum of Modern Art; Kunstverein and Kunsthalle, Dusseldorf; IVAM Centre del Carme, Valencia; and the Whitney Museum of American Art, New York. A fully-illustrated catalogue designed by the artist with an essay by Neville Wakefield will accompany the exhibition.