That person is either the dumbest motherfucker on earth... or the stupidest fucking human being on the face of the planet. When two architects are speaking, a construction worker does NOT interrupt to say "where's my shovel". 

We should catch up over zoom, I feel like that little bit of sadness is a thing these days

I need to get authorization from the undersecretary to give you a full debrief. However, I can paraphrase thus…
Someone in charge of polishing the accounting coconut shells that get rearranged on a quarterly basis took a look at the old balance sheet,  and thought…

my time management lately has been complete shit.

undermajordomominor deputy-head-chopper-offer assistant to the vice-admiral of all lettings-go and corporate re-orgs

can I have those org chart slides? 

did I tell you we had a bald eagle on our property a while back? I think they all split now, but for a while we were seeing them a lot.

I found out that our township area voted 60% for Biden, so it turns out to be less Trump country than I thought.

damn, you can’t even be a fucking martyr. 

we have a bunch of Flickers rattling on up here and one of these guys has been hanging out lately.

you’re building the start of a wilderness porn empire. I got a bird app the other day. It’s pretty impressive. Like Shazam for bird calls. wtf is the little creep hole about? How’s Ivy? Are both of you still up with the wildlings beyond the wall? The newest addition to the office. 30 minutes walking while working and I feel like a whole new person!

I’ve just had a realisation that food and web hooks is the combo I’ve been looking for ever since I started web dev work

A former treasure hunter named Jovan Pulitzer has opened his mouth and unleashed words which, have triggered a multimillion dollar forensic boondoggle in Arizona. The goal? To uncover a vast conspiracy to adulterate the vote with 40,000  China ballots in order to get Joe Biden elected. This renaissance man of science espouses a school of thought that basically says… “if there’s bamboo traces in the paper, we HAVE GOT THEM”.

I don't know if it's a language barrier, but certainly there's a huge communication problem where loney is consistently unable to properly represent a problem to us, nor to represent the proper message back to the customer.

A growing number of people are trying to prove once and for all that the mythical half-ape, half-human yowie exists. So what drives them?