When I was a boy, I remember the amazing bedtime stories my mom would tell me about ancient times in Korea, about monks and wisemen and sorcerers and astronomers. She was a remarkable storyteller, and half the time, I wasn’t sure if she was just making stuff up. I tried testing her by asking her to retell stories (to identify inconsistencies) but I don’t think I actually cared about keeping score. The stories were that good. She was also an amazing teacher. She taught me how to grow vegetables, how to use an abacus, how to roller skate, how to write cursive letters, how to draw a face, how to invent games from string, … the list goes on. She did this without the internet.My mother was born in 1951, in the shadows of artillery bombardments, blackmarket gang wars, and typhoid outbreaks. She grew up in Pusan, South Korea and nearly starved to death in the first few years of her life because of food scarcity brought on by the war. She survived, but was unable to walk until the age of three. Growing up, she took care of her father and her younger brothers. I’m not sure if her family knew it, but my grandfather was dying of peptic ulcers and colon cancer. She was his favorite. When he finally passed, my mom gave up going to school, and fully committed herself to helping my grandmother maintain a house, and raise three boys. In those days, most houses didn’t have plumbing – her’s certainly didn’t. For a kitchen, they had the equivalent of a pot belly stove which required kindling and wood. She chopped the wood. She fetched the water. Living life during and immediately after a war is hard business. You have to become hard. Between the ages of 5 and 14, my mom acquired the kinds of skills you’d be more likely to associate with a smuggler or a pirate, and she is very familiar with what people will resort to eating when conditions become unbearable. Thinking about this today, on mother’s day, makes me a little extra sad. I never acknowledged my mom’s trauma. I don’t think it was in the range of possibility for me, only because my world was one of abundance and pretend-struggles, a zillion miles away from where she came from. There is just no way for someone like me to imagine the scale of loss she experienced. She never once played a game of catch, or swung on a swing, or had a favorite toy. She never even saw a toy growing up. Although my mom didn’t get to experience a childhood, I’d like to think that when she became a mother, something transformed all of the unhappiness she endured into a new purpose: raising me and my sister. She rewrote her narrative. And she did this with nobody cheering her on, or showing the way, or even suggesting it was even possible. She is an incredible mom. A heroic mom. She projected a world of humor and resiliency and hope; a world for me to feel safe in. I believe many immigrants have a mom like mine. By the wayI’m working on a personal project to help middle school kids. It’s very specific to New York City, but anyone is welcome to check it out. I’m sending out the first email blast tonight – on Mother’s day. I didn’t plan that by the way.

Sphex is the colloquial name of a particular kind of digger wasp. Daniel Dennett effectively uses this wasp’s burrowing routine to show how, even basic examinations of animal behavior can lead us right to the doorstep of causal determinism: the belief that everything (ie: particle systems, wasp brains, human courtship rituals, the universe) can be explained as states of affairs, resulting from some previous state(s) of affairs in a purely mechanistic fashion.When a causally deterministic outlook is applied to questions of agency, free will, and consciousness, the implications pile up fast. Some interesting explorations of this issue can be found in popular shows like Devs [FX] and West World [HBO].All animals have default routinesIf you’re the type of person who likes to read the source material, then… Elbow Room, The Varieties of Free Will Worth Wanting. I’ve included an extended quote below.

"The wasp’s routine is to bring the paralyzed cricket to the burrow, leave it on the threshold, go inside to see that all is well, emerge, and then drag the cricket in. If the cricket is moved a few inches away while the wasp is inside making her preliminary inspection, the wasp, on emerging from the burrow, will bring the cricket back to the threshold, but not inside, and will then repeat the preparatory procedure of entering the burrow to see that everything is all right. If again the cricket is removed a few inches while the wasp in inside, once again she will move the cricket up to the threshold and re-enter the burrow for a final check. The wasp never thinks of pulling the cricket straight in. On one occasion this procedure was repeated forty times, always with the same result."

Humans have routines too, that sometimes fail tragicallyWhen my twin daughters were still babies, there was a steady stream of horrifying stories about parents who had left their infant children inside of hot cars – buckled into child seats inside vehicles that were above 120° – only to return hours later to find their children dead. Here are just two examples from 2009 and 2014. The parents of these children were almost always unaccompanied by their spouse, just running an errand. As a father, I wanted to react with anger and judgement toward these people; which is exactly the kind of reaction you saw in the communities of these parents. Their behavior was vilified and condemned – characterized as extreme criminal negligence. After all, how could any decent parent not place the health and welfare of their own child above… a trip to Costco? What if the failings of human beings were examined with the same root cause analysis applied to failing dishwashers?If you and I began talking about a dishwasher that failed to successfully clean the utensils on the top rack, we wouldn’t begin by launching an investigation into the morality of its circuits and capacitors. That would be insane. Not long after the tragic stories of the dead infants began appearing, I noticed a greater availability of research (to ordinary people) around topics like context switching, decision fatigue, and perception blindness; all issues that are strikingly relevant to any person who spends long chunks of time doing “brain work”. Anecdotally, all of my friends in software development can attest to adaptations they’ve had to make professionally, in order to accommodate more information and less focus time. Even my friends who don’t work in engineering disciplines notice these changes. Things like:Multi-tasking during meetingsTexting while drivingAnswering emails in bed or checking Slack while on the toiletSetting up complex automated reminders to get up and go to the bathroomLosing the ability to understand highway maps, and simply relying on GPS to navigateSelf-managed routinization of behavior is a huge optimization, not a source of diminishment

Imagine if you had to exert effort at remembering how exactly to brush your teeth, or eat a slice of pizza, or clip your toenails. We can do these things (and more) with minimal effort because they are not worth the brain resources. Kind of like exchanging a greeting with someone on the sidewalk: “Hey, how’s it goin’ today?”“Great, great, how you doin’?” ☝🏽 is not an example of a question and answer session. It’s an optimization you see and participate in, every day. Our brains take up an enormous percentage of the calories we consume, and by implication, we need to parcel out its resources with the utmost prudence. Like sphex, we each come with built-in routines that help us operate in the world we find ourselves in. Unlike sphex, we are algorithm factories capable of peering into the guts of our firmware, and even rewriting our software. And that is a big deal. I have nothing against dishwashers by the wayThere are over 55 miles of canals inside a single human tooth. They all exist for a reason, and those reasons extend way way back, billions (not millions) of years; back to causes that were brought about by conditions that predated mouths. We’re at the tail end of an enormously long story arc written in the language of nucleotides. According to Richard Dawkins, we are just the containers/vessels for the genuine authors of this story: our genes. What we think of as “us” – our bodies, personalities, fears, and dreams – are really the macroscopic armor-plating and side effects of the true us: the individual genes that have persisted in unbroken continuity for billions of years. However, if you’ve never had the misfortune of having to disassemble a dishwasher and replace its food chopper assembly, or even just taking the goddamn front door off its hinges, I can report to you that it is not what you’d call “straightforward”. 

Even if man really were nothing but a piano-key, even if this were proved to him by natural science and mathematics, even then he would not become reasonable, but would purposely do something perverse out of simple ingratitude, simply to gain his point. And if he does not find means he will contrive destruction and chaos, will contrive sufferings of all sorts, only to gain his point! He will launch a curse upon the world, and as only man can curse (it is his privilege, the primary distinction between him and other animals), may be by his curse alone he will attain his object—that is, convince himself that he is a man and not a piano-key! If you say that all this, too, can be calculated and tabulated—chaos and darkness and curses, so that the mere possibility of calculating it all beforehand would stop it all, and reason would reassert itself, then man would purposely go mad in order to be rid of reason and gain his point! I believe in it, I answer for it, for the whole work of man really seems to consist in nothing but proving to himself every minute that he is a man and not a piano-key!

I’ve known and worked with Chewie since 2008. Once in LA, he bought me the greatest chocolate chip cookie I ever had. It was a little place called the Coffee Commissary. A funny thing about him is that he’s a little klutzy, which is odd, because he’s an outstanding rock climber. One year, at one of our summits, he nearly killed our CFO when a horseshoe came flying out of his hands. Total accident, no one got hurt. And despite being very fit, he was, and continues to be a genuine fan of the crap food at Panda Express. Review Excerpt 

Chewie is like a fucking force of nature. Once, when we were on site at Warner Brothers for a meeting regarding an upcoming film, an intern approached him with a simple question - “Why do you smell like that?”. Chewie turned around, whispered something I couldn’t hear, then tore a phone book in fucking HALF. Not literally of course, but with his eyes he did this –– then strongly urged everyone to take a three hour lunch.  I would entrust my first born child to Chewie’s care, and if it were within my power, would commission a sword of the finest steel to be crafted, bearing his likeness rendered in the hilt from mother of pearl fetched out of the Sea of Japan, laden with Etruscan engravings along the blade, and the three known remaining teeth of Saint Peter. I would furthermore, gift him the finest incense and sweet meats available - perhaps taken from the lunch menu of Panda Express Burbank (the one on Magnolia Blvd, not Hollywood Way). 

Like before, there was a line of people queued up for in-processing – 4 ahead of me, and at least a dozen behind me. Everyone was masked up and standing a few feet apart from each other. The colorful foot-shaped silhouettes, marking social-distance waypoints were missing from the concrete. We were bunched up in the rear, and to the side of the building, all coiled up along a thin band of sidewalk squares below construction scaffolding.It reminded me of the army: being quiet next to strangers, waiting for something to happen. So I chit-chatted with an old Jamaican lady in front of me. She was there helping her coworker, holding a spot in line as her friend went to park her car. 

“She’s a little heavy – doesn’t move around too good, ya know?”

She went on to explain how at first, she was hesitant to get the vaccine. But when she saw it work for her husband, she had a complete turnaround. Apparently, he had some large swelling on one of his feet from an unrelated condition, but when he received his first  injection, the swelling almost entirely disappeared within an hour. She emphasized the size of it with gestures of her hands. I got the impression it was about half the diameter of a log of lamb meat you often see rotating on a vertical spindle at a gyro joint. “It went right down!”  This episode convinced the lady the vaccine contained a secret booster agent – a kind of general palliative against inflammation. God bless those boys at Pfizer! The episode with her husband’s foot swelling clinched it for that lady. She went and got herself vaccinated, and since then, has been a nonstop evangelist to everyone in her social circle (church, family, friends) to go get vaccinated. She even explained to her contacts back in Jamaica that it was completely safe – with the added bit about inflammation. For the rest of our ten minute conversation, I barely said a word – just nodded and smiled. The lady made me feel relieved, and happy to be there. Getting in the door Just like last time, when the door opened, about 6-8 people were waved in – kind of like a Disney World ride. I was the last person allowed in. They handed us each clipboards to fill out a basic pre-shot questionnaire, then led us to a waiting area. Within 5 minutes, I was called by one of the young administrators. One Complication: the cardI didn’t bring my vaccination card. I actually thought the paper wasn’t necessary – just the patient # printed on it. Wrong (sort of). Apparently, for people who want to walk out of their 2nd appointment with tangible evidence of full vaccination will need to bring the original card they were given on the day of their first shot. I started getting worried.

Me… Are you saying that I’m going to need to go home, go get that card, and... are you saying that I won’t be able to get my second shot today?

Her… No – the card is just a convenience. For some people who need to show it to their employer as proof of vaccination, they’ve been using those cards. But we’ve been told not to re-issue cards, because people have been selling them.  Say you came in and got vaccinated, got your card punched and filled out. Now you walk out of here with proof. You go sell that card to someone who wants to show it to their boss.

Me… OK, I got it. No, I’m not interested in the card. I just want the shot. When it was finally my turn to get the shot, I wound up getting the same nurse: a lady around my age with the last name Carter. She said she remembered me from last time. Per my instructions from my wife, I asked Carter to give me the lot # and expiration date of the vaccine I was about to receive. Where in the holy hell would civilization be without women? Lot #: ER8727 Expiration date: July 30, 2021.

August, 1982 -- a few weeks before I entered the fifth grade, I sat at the kitchen table eating a toasted cheese sandwich. My dad had just put a kettle of water on the stove to make a cup of Taster’s Choice, and as usual, I asked if I could mix it for him. Sure, why not was what he said. That’s what he always said. Then he went over to sit down at his spot at the table. On that particular night, it was just the two of us. My mom and sister were next door at Mrs. White’s house playing backgammon. Earlier in the day, my dad and I had gone to see the afternoon showing of Blade Runner at the Walnut Mall Theater. I was still riled up from it, and thought about my favorite scenes: the old guy getting his skull crushed in by Rutger Hauer… and Daryl Hannah doing back handsprings onto Harrison Ford’s shoulders. When the kettle started whistling, I turned the stove dial to the off position, and filled up the coffee cup my dad had prepared. I mixed it with a few turns of a spoon, took a little sip with my back to him, and walked it over to the table. As soon as my butt hit the chair, I blurted out a question.

"What do you know about robots dad?"

He chuckled softly and took a sip. When he set his cup down, he talked for a while about their history and current state of technical advancement. He mentioned a lot of stuff about factories, which aggravated me because I wanted to hear about lasers and bombs. A minute later, he told me a story about some small device that he says his brother worked on while doing research for the navy that had something or other to do with the space shuttle. How it related, I have no idea. He just kept going on and on in that way. Sometimes, he’d talk about math and engineering, mentioning names of people I’d never heard of before, and how their blah-blah-blah impacted yada-yada-yada. I was starting to regret having asked the question in the first place, and just tuned out and stared at the salt and pepper shakers in the wooden napkin holder in front of me. Then he said something like:

<blah blah blah> "laws of robotics."
"Laws?" I asked.
"Yes." he said. Then came the qualifier. "Well… according to Asimov." 

He looked over at me, anticipating my next question, and added this:

"Asimov was the founder of robot theory. A science fiction writer, and a quite capable scientist as well. According to him, there are three imperatives to which all robots must adhere. The laws constrain how robots go about their primary programming functions."

He looked over to me with his eyes squinted and eyebrows mashed up, sensing that his previous statements had lulled me into a stupor. Then came a quick course correction.

"Programming - what they do, what they’re designed for. Like taking care of babies or driving a car."
"What about a robot that guards against intruders?" I suggested. 
"Yes, exactly." My dad’s voice became slightly more animated. "So, imagine a world, much like our own, inhabited by robots of varying purposes. Each one goes about its tasks, but once in awhile, robots with different purposes might bump into each other. For example, if a robot driving an ambulance were rushing to the hospital with a dying patient, and suddenly came to a narrow intersection where another robot was crossing with a baby in a stroller, what should happen?"

I thought about it for awhile, and said --
"I think the ambulance driver robot should move out of the way so the baby is safe."
Yeah. That’s reasonable.
"Impossible." my dad shot back. "Oncoming traffic prevents the robot from swerving out of the way." 
Jesus H. Christ, I could tell where this was going.
"Then the ambulance should slam on the brakes." I added. But before I even finished that sentence, my dad was shaking his head from side to side.
"At the speed the ambulance is moving, it can’t stop in time. The ambulance can’t swerve or stop in time to avoid the baby." 
"Can’t the robot with the baby move out of the way in time?"
I was getting a little pissed off to be honest. This robot sounded like a total dipshit.
"Not in time. Robots of that model aren’t designed for quick acceleration." 
Robots of that fucking model! I almost asked him if the baby in the stroller was a real baby, thinking that his hypothetical scenario had morphed into one of those awful brain teasers involving a murder, a puddle of water, and two witnesses. I resisted the urge. My dad wasn’t the type to string you along, and I hated asking dumb questions.
"Can the babysitter robot do anything?" I asked.
"Yes, and this is where the law of robotics comes into play. The first law states -- A robot may not injure a human being or, through inaction, allow a human being to come to harm."
My dad went on...
"This compels the ambulance driving robot to get his dying patient to the hospital in time for doctors to attempt to save his life. And it compels the other robot to protect the baby so that no harm comes to it." 
I worked it out in my head, and nodded once I accepted his reasons.
"Ok." he continued. "So the second law states -- A robot must obey orders given it by human beings except where such orders would conflict with the First Law. That law doesn’t really come into play in our example. But then there’s the third law -- A robot must protect its own existence as long as such protection does not conflict with the First or Second Law."
That’s when he trailed off, and smiled at me. It was a goofy open mouthed, wide-eyed smile that he did every time he wanted me to answer a tough question, and thought I was getting warmer.
"I don’t know. Maybe… maybe the, hold on. Can’t the robot with the baby do something, like sacrifice - "
"Sacrifice itself! Yes! That’s what MUST happen. It’s the only logical recourse in this scenario. Both robots have interpreted events in the exact same way, and know exactly how things must play out. The robot with the baby knows without a doubt that since the other robot has not even attempted to slow down or swerve out of the way, it must be transporting a patient who absolutely must get to the hospital. And the ambulance driving robot knows without a doubt that the robot with the baby cannot allow it to die, and also knows that the other robot has already figured out the reason why the ambulance hasn’t slowed down. So…" 
I was getting warm, I could tell.
"Maybe the robot with the baby pushes the stroller to someone on the sidewalk, and then… gets hit by the ambulance?"
"Exactly! And the reason why there’s a 100% chance that is what will happen is that both robots are controlled by the same underlying laws of robotics, which can never ever be superseded by any other programming. They are the immutable laws of robotics."
I asked him what immutable meant, and he pulled one of his favorite moves. Instead of just telling me, he began a new story - the old tale within a tale approach to elaboration.

He asked me to imagine a pool playing robot, one that was capable of sinking any shot with 100% accuracy. OK, got it. But wait, this pool playing robot had collected enormous amounts of data on the physics of ball-to-ball collisions as well as ball-to-rail collisions, and was also an expert at striking the cue ball with the stick at various angles and speeds to apply different types of spin - English is what it’s properly called. The robot could do things like make the cue ball jump a ball, then travel backwards -- or swerve around a ball, strike a second ball, then slow to a stop -- or bring the ball airborne so that it struck the railing, ricocheted off, and hit a ball which would then sink, bounce off to hit another ball that would go on to sink, and come to a stop before scratching. This robot was basically unstoppable at pool. I remember the story of the pool playing robot because the idea of it as a real thing was a near carbon copy of a scene from one of my favorite movies, The Cat From Outer Space. I never even knew that my dad was aware of the existence of pool. And then he asked me a question.
"Why do you think the robot is so much better at pool than even the world’s best player?" 
I was thinking of the best way to answer, but my dad didn’t even wait.
"It’s essentially infallible because it has a perfect understanding of all the factors that determine how the balls move. But beyond that, it has a near flawless capacity to control its own movements with the pool cue, allowing it to set the cue ball into motion in an exact and precise way each and every time. When the robot wants to sink a ball into a pocket, all it has to do is trace a backward path of motion from the pocket to a ball-to-ball collision, and then it must effectuate that ball-to-ball collision. The thing that makes the robot so good is its knowledge of the laws of physics. Things like acceleration and deceleration, angular momentum, vector-based collisions, and to a smaller extent friction. Does this all make sense?"
The crazy thing was, it did make sense to me, even though I had no idea what all that shit like angular momentum was. I was still thinking of the Disney movie The Cat From Outer Space. It was about a space alien who crash-landed on earth, but the thing is, the alien wasn’t a slimy green creature. It was an orange tabby cat with a glowing necklace that allowed it to telepathically talk to humans, and move objects with its mind.

The cat had to team up with Ken Berry in order to evade the military, and repair its flying saucer to get home. But along the way, it got mixed up in some kind of pool hustling scam, so it used the necklace to basically run the table, and then beat the crap out of the tough guys who wound up getting taken to the cleaners.

That pool hall scene was hilarious, and for sure, was the best part of the whole movie. As my dad went deeper into his robot analogy, I just kept replaying that scene from the movie, visualizing a bunch of red dotted lines to account for the cat’s telekinetic beams. I looked back up at my dad, solidly convinced that my intense movie inspired reverie managed to impart in me all the learning one might acquire in a prestigious four year engineering program.
"Yeah, it makes sense. The robot never misses because it knows exactly what’s going to happen before it even takes a shot. The balls all have to follow the rules."
"That’s exactly it! Those rules are the laws of physics, and they’re immutable because they don’t ever change. Gravity, for example, isn’t going to work differently on tuesdays and thursdays. And the mass of the balls isn’t going to change from moment to moment."
Precisely, I thought. I nodded to register my approval.
"Now, imagine that the pool table is the universe." He paused to take a sip from his cup. "And the balls are the objects in it."
"And we’re like the robot because we have science." I added with a smile.
"No." he said. "God is like the robot. But unlike the robot, God is perfect, all powerful, and can never die. We are like the balls on the table. One of countless balls." He glanced over at me when he said that, as if to gauge my reaction, then continued.  "Obviously, the laws that govern our behavior are more complicated than the ones controlling pool balls, but these laws exist, and to a great extent are discoverable by us."
I brought my hands up to crack my knuckles, and stared hard at the napkin holder in front of me. I was starting to get the sinking feeling that my make-believe engineering degree from just a moment ago had banged up into a hard and absolute limitation. The laws are discoverable by us.
"So God is playing pool with us?" 
"No, I wouldn’t say that. I would say that God created the game, racked up the balls, took a single shot, then put the stick away. "
Still not cool. Not in my mind.
"Kind of like the big bang?" I half-asked.
He laughed and said --
"Yeah, you could say that."
After a long silence, my dad let out a yawn, and stood up from the table. Maybe he could see I was agitated because he walked over to the kitchen sink, and started fussing around with the faucet. I stared at the napkin holder on the table, and picked at the skin of my cuticles. My dad was rinsing out his coffee cup in the sink, and putting it in the dish rack. As he wiped his hands on the fronts of his pants, he added this: "You and I are a lot more complex than pool balls. There’s something called free will. Come on buddy, let’s go to bed." 

That night, before closing my eyes, I prayed to God, and asked him to tell me if he was like the pool playing robot. He didn’t even have to answer in words. He could just send me a sign, like moving the closet door or making the moon flash off and on a few times. My dad’s explanation from earlier had all sorts of wheels spinning in my head. I mean, everything in the world is made from atoms right? Steel, wood, skin, water, airplanes, golf clubs and ice cream and dog shit and bullets. Everything. And if I recall correctly, every science book known to man shows atoms as spherical objects (aka: really teeny tiny pool balls). Jesus Christ, everything in the whole world, including me, my thoughts, and my current anxiety attack, is just a piece of a never-ending cosmic game of hungry hungry hippos with an infinite number of balls, and exactly zero players! My heart was beating so fast, I kicked my legs a few times to try to reset my body, thinking that maybe I could Fonzie myself into calming down. I looked over toward my bedroom door, and thought for a moment of slipping into bed with my parents. I held my breath, and stayed as quiet and still as I could manage. When I would do that, the stillness would actually acquire a type of high pitched ringing sound all its own that I found relaxing. In a minute or so, I was somewhat back to normal.

What was it that I said to my dad that he agreed with? The robot never misses because it knows exactly what’s going to happen before it even takes a shot. The balls all have to follow the rules. Do they really? I wondered if they could follow a different set of rules.

I didn’t have the words to sum up my despair, but the idea of everything there is, everything I’ll ever become, just… emanating from a single stupid collision of cosmic particles made me want to disappear into my blanket and surrender. I fell asleep that night, thinking that the whole universe was completely and totally rigged. I didn’t give a shit about whether God was like the pool player or not. I just didn’t want to be like the ball.

On November 2, 1795, James K. Polk (aka: Napoleon of the stump) was born. Forty nine years later, he would be elected eleventh president of the United States. That is established fact. Shortly after being sworn in, his blood was infected with the memetic super virus with the euphemistic appellation of manifest destiny. Epidemiologists of my current time identify ground zero of the outbreak as New York City, and attribute its initial release to a lawyer-turned-newspaperman named James O’Sullivan by way of the July 1845 issue of Democratic Review. Despite the journal’s low readership, the meme replicated along a disease vector exclusively dominated by a small subset of white New Yorkers whose wealth and social status conferred a host of privileges: some real, some imaginary.

Through no fault of his own, Polk was exposed - perhaps right away in a speech, or via newspaper, or perhaps through second or third hand account from a reader who came into contact with O’Sullivan’s published words - that is not clear to us at the moment. What is obvious is the swiftness of the aftermath.
Take the case of Minnesota 
In 1849, though it was an official territory, most of the place was not what you’d call move-in ready. It was occupied by hundreds of thousands of Sioux Indians. No person in their right white mind back in those days, would want to live in a wilderness swarming with mocassin-wearing killers. Measures had to be taken, something had to be done.

So, in 1851, Minnesota’s commissioner of Indian Affairs - a little peckerwood named Luke Lea - printed a beautiful color map with lots of numbers and lines. The greatest feature of this map was the line that followed the Mississippi river - the one making a diagonal cut across Minnesota, and up toward North Dakota. Everything to the left of that line, for all intents and purposes, was Indian. On the right, were the white folks. With respect to that map, Luke Peckerwood assembled a group of wordsmithing lawyers to produce a contract, which was then foisted upon representatives of the Sioux Indians, along with several crates of whiskey, and it basically went something like this...
“The following articles of a treaty between the See-see-toan and Wah-pay-toan bands of Dakota or Sioux Indians and the United States government, signed on the twenty-third day of July, eighteen hundred and fifty-one shall lay out the terms by which said Indians agree to cede and vacate the twenty four MILLION acres of land to the south and west of the Mississippi River, heretofore referred to as Area 289, and to never return. 

In full consideration of said cession, we, the government of the United States, agree to pay said Indians a total of $1,665,000. We also agree to throw in two skinny strips of land along the Minnesota River, each twenty miles wide and fourteen miles long, where said Indians may hunt, fish and engage in recreational activities. 
We reserve the right to unconditionally reinterpret this agreement at any moment of our choosing.” 
-- Treaty of Traverse des Sioux, 1851

This was an ALL CASH, YOU MUST ACT NOW offer. So the Indians agreed, and lickety-split, Area 289 became a bonafide manifest destiny zone. Every white person around was suddenly ready like Freddy to build towns, plow land, and make babies. Newspapers like the Minnesota Pioneer cheerfully predicted... “a rapidity of growth unparalleled even in the annals of Western progress… Here [settlers] will find an unqualifiedly healthy climate, fertile and well drained lands, and upon the Mississippi the best market for mechanical products in the Union. With such a population will come not only the arts but science and morals. Our Falls of St. Anthony with hundreds of water powers upon other streams will be turned to manufacturing purposes. Thrifty towns will arise upon them. Our undulating prairies will rejoice under the hand of husbandry; these hills and valleys will be jocund with the voices of school children, and churches shall mark the moral progress of our land.” 
-- James Goodhue, Editor of the Minnesota Pioneer

In the early days after the signing of the treaty of Traverse des Sioux (yes, that is what they called it), just twenty miles inside Area 289, small settlements began springing up along the Sauk River that branched off of the Mississippi. One was Munson Township, later renamed Richmond. It was entirely composed of German Catholic immigrants, who had come at the urging of one of their own countrymen - a missionary by the name of Francis Pierz. In the spring of 1852, Pierz left the diocese of Detroit - some say on bad terms - and joined up with Bishop Joseph Crétin, the newly appointed Bishop of Area 289. Crétin and Pierz weren’t a likely pair, but as it turned out, were well suited to work as partners.

Crétin was a Frenchman with smooth hands and philosophical leanings. At seminary, he established himself as a well read, pompous and ambitious kind of prick who took an especial delight in poking holes in the epistemology of Descartes - in Latin of course. His letter writing abilities and powers of persuasion were key factors in obtaining funds for Pierz’s guerilla tactics with the Chippewa during the brutal winter of ‘56.

Pierz was a pragmatic man of action - a point man - sort of the Magnum PI to Pierz’s Higgins. After a face-to-face meeting with Crétin in St. Cloud, in which the men divvied up the territory, Pierz agreed to take everything north of the Twin Cities. He wound up establishing relations with small bands of Chippewa while operating out of the northern river town of Old Crow Wing. When he wasn’t ministering to the Indians, he’d write lengthy promotional articles in the Minnesota Pioneer and the Sauk Rapids Frontiersman, extolling the virtues of the region.
“More than half the open meadows in Minnesota have an excellent black loamy soil, with a splendid mixture of sand and clay and a rich top-soil formed by the plant decay of thousands of years, so that it would be hard to find anywhere in the world a soil better suited to yield a rich return for the farmers' toil… [and] … I can assure my readers that not half the rivers and hardly a third of the lakes of this beautiful region are indicated on the maps. Moreover, in many places one will find springs of ice-cold drinking water, and if here and there a farmer does not happen to have such a supply at his door, he can in a few days and at little cost dig a splendid well at a depth of from eight to twelve feet. Hence immigrants need not fear any lack of water.” -- Francis Pierz, 1853

Of course, he left out the part about the thirty below zero winters, and the dirty swamps teeming with mosquitoes. But that was how Pierz was - a man of action who, when even slightly pressed to defend an action, eagerly deferred to the teleological suspension of the ethical. His aim was to persuade the thousands of German Catholics living in Ohio, Iowa, and Indiana to abandon their current towns, and pack up for Minnesota to stake land claims along the Sauk River region. He envisioned a Teutonic eden of dairy farms, flour mills, and foundries.

Though fourteen years older than Crétin, Pierz was still physically imposing. He had a thick back and chest, and lunged around on top of large powerful thighs. At the age of sixty eight, he was still able to trek forty miles on foot through marshland, while lugging around seventy pounds of blankets and supplies. The catechist was made to drag the two hundred pound birch bark canoe, and the cook had to carry a hundred and fifty pounds of food and utensils. The Chippewa at first thought Pierz was touched in the head, but later came to hold the view that he was a powerful spiritual man - perhaps even, a reincarnation of one of the original seven fires. Over time, as Pierz became a regular fixture, the Chippewa children were frequently deployed to steal his socks. They would give them to the elders, who would boil them along with other ingredients to make home remedies for rheumatism. They even gave him a nickname - old man black gown. Their affection for him developed slowly, but was genuine. It took two full years, but Pierz won over the Indians’ trust. That changed after the winter of ‘56.

Spring 1855 –– The Willenbrings were among the original sixty five families that arrived by covered wagon in the spring of 1855. By June, Frank Arnold Willenbring established good relations with Father Pierz, and convinced him to finance the purchase of a large floor loom. Willenbring worked out an arrangement with Pierz whereby he was allowed to operate the loom in exchange for weaving a fixed number of bolts of cloth, which he would sell to the church at cost. Anything beyond the agreed-upon number of bolts were his to sell or keep as he chose. That arrangement held for a year and a half, at which point, Frank used his earnings to purchase the loom outright from the church, freeing him from the original agreement with Pierz. The loom, which had been housed in the log cabin parish house, was moved to the Willenbring family house less than a mile away.

In the summer of 1987, I asked Roger Willenbring for some help with my car. It was a '72 Datsun B210 I picked up from Automart on route 45 two days earlier. What a piece of shit. But hey, it could start -- you just had to twiddle with the choke and the throttle. There was even a hole in the front floorboard of the passenger side, covered up with a ten by ten piece of carpeted plywood. I made sure to point out the hole to the assistant manager before offering him $188 on the spot. He took it after 5 minutes of badly rehearsed hemming and hawing, then helped me push start it off the lot. The fifteen mile ride back to Fort Sheridan took an hour, but the engine managed to stay running the whole way without a single stall.

That was two days ago. Since then, it wouldn't start, not even when I tried the trick with the choke and the throttle. A push-start was out of the question without a second person, so it just sat there in the parking lot of the barracks. Then it occurred to me to call Willenbring to come help me out. He was a smart guy, very mechanical, and good at figuring stuff out. He could probably fix the car permanently. Even patch up the hole in the floorboard. I called the CQ desk. Kelner was probably working the phone.

"Echo company 45th Quartermasters, this is Sergeant Kelner."
"Kelner, you fuckin' retard. It's me."
I couldn't resist. Kelner was in fact, a douche of the highest order - I mean, like a fucking five star general. In the background, I heard a small clicking noise, then someone yelling "OH SHIT!". They must've been playing darts.
"Holy shit, when in the god damn are you coming back to duty soldier?" he asked, half distracted.
"I'm still sick. Gastroenteritis man, I'm taking these horse pills the size of your mom's cock." 
"Shut the fuck up. What do you want?"
His reaction made me grin into the phone.
"Listen, I need you to gimme' Sergeant Willenbring's phone number."
"Willenbring? Why? What, are you two fuckin' eachother?"
"Just gimme' the fuckin' number. He was supposed to help me fix up my car."
"You have a car?" 
Did I not mention that Kelner was entirely made of grade-A dog shit?
"You are a fucking troglodyte. Do you even know what that is Kelner? Is Maggio with you? Just hand the phone over to him."
This is how it went for another two minutes. Until Maggio snatched the phone, asked me what I wanted, and gave me the phone number. When I called Willenbring, he picked up on the first ring. I explained my situation, and he agreed to help.
"What time would be good for you?" he asked.
"Is uh... three o'clock this sunday ok for you?" 

Willenbring arrived fifteen minutes early, and as was his usual, remained seated in his car until the agreed-upon meeting time. He walked up to my door holding a black leather doc bag, dressed in navy blue shorts and a white short sleeve button down shirt with grease stains on the front pockets. We shook hands and walked down the stairwell out to the parking lot, where I pointed out the car. He walked over briskly, gradually accelerating toward the car. I took a stutter step to keep up with him.
Willenbring: "Ok, open 'er up. Let's take a look." 
I popped open the hood, and stepped away to give him plenty of room. He fished out a small pocket flashlight from the doc bag he carried, and swept it back and forth along the various innards. I didn't know what the hell any of it was, but suddenly, he switched off the light, bent down, and asked me --
"When was the last time you changed your spark plugs?"
"I've never changed them - man, I just got this thing!" 
"These spark plugs are very dirty. We'll need to clean them."
Then this happened...
He bent down, reached into the doc bag again, this time pulling out a long once-white rag streaked with grease and motor oil. He carefully unfurled it, then laid it out on the asphalt next to the front driver's side wheel. He stood up, bent over into the engine compartment, removed one spark plug, crouched down by his rag, and placed it on top. He repeated this in one-by-one fashion in the slow precise movements of a metronome. On the third go-round, he started talking. He mentioned some crap about an uncle. Uncle Eugene, apparently some kinda' wizard at fixing stuff. Turns out uncle Eugene developed a number of patents with respect to grommets. Fucking grommets. That's how it all started. I'm sure of it now.
But how are grommets related to spark plugs?
"I'm glad you asked." 
He explained how they were related. And how Uncle Eugene was fascinated by electrical devices as a child, and that later as a grown man, had a small mechanical insight which led to a subtle improvement in a well known problem involving the life expectancy of spark plugs. And that this helped him secure his first patent. Just when I thought he was done, he gave an overview of the history of grommets - you know, to bring me up to speed on what might have led Eugene to the insight in the first place.
But wait...
It occurred to him that Eugene’s exquisite craftsmanship might have been the direct result of his having been a direct descendant of Franz Joseph Willenbring, who immigrated to America from Steinfeld, Germany in the very early eighteen hundreds. Ok, he'd have to set aside the historical survey of grommets momentarily to briefly fill me in on Franz’s back story.
Franz the cooper
Franz Willenbring was a moderately successful member of the cooper guild in the Netherlands, and was well regarded by many of the tradesmen in the boating industry. But just in case you don't know what a cooper is... a cooper is a specialized carpenter who not only builds barrels for dry goods being transported by boat, he also fixes and rebuilds new barrels as they get damaged in transit from one port to another. A skilled cooper can repair a busted barrel filled with rice, aboard a rocking ship without losing a single grain - which was important to the investors! To really hammer the point home, he reminded me (and you) of the difficulties of transatlantic voyages in the eighteenth century, and that the whole enterprise was very financially risky, not like today at all, with the steel shipping containers made in China. Many many poor sailors drowned at sea transporting God knows what from God knows where.
America
Franz used his profession as a cooper to hitch a ride aboard a boat that took him all the way from Holland to Baltimore. And once there, he made the journey to Iowa, where he established himself as a carpenter for a man named Isaac Heying.
Back in Steinfeld, Germany
While under the employ of Heying, Franz wrote a letter to his wife back in Steinfeld, indicating his desire for her to pack up their three children and join him in America. Being a dutiful wife, that’s exactly what she did, and was scheduled to arrive in the summer of 1844.
Franz => Frank
Poor Franz died one week before his family arrived, but was survived by his wife and three children. His youngest son, Franz Arnold Willenbring junior, proved to be capable with a hammer, and was hired by the very same Mr. Heying. He even changed his name to Frank at the urging of his mother, who sensed that her boys would need to have good American names in order to make something of themselves. It is documented, both in church papers and family letters that Frank worked for Mr. Heying for several years before relocating to the Sauk Rapids in 1855 with sixty four other German immigrants. It was a muddy mosquito-infested river town about twenty miles west of Minneapolis. Once there, Frank would eventually marry, and have a son named Herman, who in turn would have a son named Eugene, who would one day grow up to become an inventor of grommets.
Prelude to growing ennui
My father realized that this information - much like Craftsman Tools’ no questions asked return policy - needed time to sink in, so he worked in silence for what seemed to be several minutes. During this time, I began noticing less and less. For instance, I didn't even flinch when I referred to Willenbring as my father just now. But let's move on.

He poked and prodded the car in silence for a few minutes longer, cleaned all the spark plugs, replaced them, then offered a terse synopsis of his next step: the alternator. After another shorter  silence, he resumed his brief history of grommets. Not being totally clueless to my growing ennui, he graciously gave the executive summary. But his thoughts were on Europe, which of course, wound up opening the door to a long discussion of maritime exploration on the part of the Dutch, English, Spanish and Portuguese empires. Naturally, he assumed these topics were of great interest to me. Which... they were. That was unexpected too.
A vast causal chain of events
"There is a vast causal chain..." he began.
That takes us from the French revolution all the way back to Marco Polo... and to the European spice trade with the far east, then more exploration, which led to colonialism, which induced advances in shipbuilding and longer voyages, which necessitated the need for coopers. But hold on just a second man!
The middle ages were a strange time
He felt the overwhelming need to remind me of the little known fact that incestuous marriages of Europe’s nobility led to an aberrantly high probability of hemophilia in their offspring. Which explains how all those kings and queens kept making babies who died unexplainably before even reaching puberty. The talk about hemophilia and incest then brought him (and me, and you) right to the doorstep of the Aleutian Island Rats. You heard correctly.
The World behind the World
When he stopped speaking, a few seconds went by. Then a sharp slap -- high up on my back, in between my shoulder blades. And a small tugging behind my eyes above the nasal passages. This gave way to itching, and a feeling like a grain of rice worming its way through my head. Whatever that thing was, I could feel it moving, and becoming active. And it was a familiar feeling - like a muscle I've had my entire life that maybe tensed up once or twice by mistake, similar to accidentally wiggling your ears while wearing sunglasses. The grain of rice was behind my eyes.

Just for a moment, I held a dual image of the world -- one in which none of the things in my father’s story ever happened, and one where all of them did. And a small part of me was certain that just a moment earlier, Woodrow Wilson was not the twenty-eighth president of the United States, that there was never a Portuguese empire, and that my father and I were not supposed to be related. And then, that certainty was gone.

April, 1973 -- I was 6 months old, living in the small town of Pohang, South Korea with my mother. Roger Willenbring and I had not yet become acquainted. He was not yet my father - he was at that point, merely staff sergeant (SSG) Willenbring, making his way to Camp Libby by way of Taegu (aka: Daegu) in the cab of a five ton dump truck at an average speed of 14mph. His driver was twenty two year old corporal Mike Starnes of Indianapolis, Indiana, whose greatest wish in the world was to own a Pontiac Trans Am convertible - to be seen driving it up and down Fall Creek Boulevard by people he had gone to high school with.

Starnes' moustache and sideburns were weeks overdue for a trim - even by the lax standards of the motor pool. He wore his dog tags on the outside of his fatigues, and kept his cap tilted far back like a baseball player's. His front trouser pockets bulged. The contents were varied: half a biscuit double-wrapped in paper towels, a zippo lighter, a half-melted Tootsie Roll, a black Ace rubber comb, a set of keys, $2.88 in change, a leatherman he had shoplifted from the PX, three bandaids, and a pill container of aspirin he received from a visit to the medic a month earlier. Running up the side of his right thigh, a rolled up magazine with frayed edges poked out of the top fold of his cargo pocket. Jammed in with the magazine was something that looked like it might be a small hand towel. Starnes chain-smoked Marlboro Reds down to the filter, and in between smokes, he'd bite down on a fingernail or a piece of dangling cuticle, then gnaw at it for a bit, before spitting it out at the dashboard. Occasionally, some of the epidermal scraps would ricochet on to Willenbring's lap.

A few miles short of Camp Libby's gate, while in the neighboring village of Tong Bae, Willenbring asked Starnes to pull over and let him out. Starnes happily obliged. As Willenbring exited the cab of the truck, Starnes unbuttoned his top left shirt pocket, and pulled out a fresh pack of Marlboro reds, shook it a few times, held it up to his mouth, then fished out a single cigarette between his lips. He reached back into his pocket for a zippo lighter, banged the flip top open on the steering wheel, and lit up. He turned toward sergeant Willenbring, and leaned forward to aim his gaze downward a bit so the two men could eyeball each other. Before speaking, he blew a plume of smoke forcefully out the side of his mouth without breaking eye contact.
“Arright sergeant, you see this road we’re on?”
Starnes withdrew the cigarette with his right hand, and clamped it between his index and middle finger. Then he stiffened up his cigarette-holding hand, and slowly swiveled it, forearm and all, toward the windshield. It wasn’t clear if Starnes was fucking around, but the way his arm moved, it was like he was pantomiming a 203 millimeter gun turret, the type you’d see on the deck of a navy destroyer. Willenbring didn’t appreciate jokers, so he remained stone faced, and just glanced downrange to where to Starnes’ hand aimed, then back again to Starnes and nodded.
“You wanna stay on it until you see a bridge.”
Starnes paused, grinning slightly. Then he made an extremely quick and very small chopping motion with the blade of his hand, so that the gun turret transformed into a chef’s knife. The chopping motion was infinitesimal, as though Starnes were severing the tip off the world’s smallest invisible carrot. And for a moment, it appeared as though Starnes was barely holding in a laugh. This nearly caused Willenbring to lose his shit. For the next 30 seconds, he summoned every bit of self control he could muster to not scowl, and to just aim his eyes at anything but Starnes’ hand. Starnes went on grinning...
“You’ll reach the bridge in about 10 minutes."
 <PAUSE...slice>. Willenbring's eyes were narrowing. With considerable effort, he trained his gaze on Starnes' mouth, nose, and eyes.
"Take it over the creek, then turn left and walk another 5 minutes."
 <PAUSE...slice>
"You’ll see a cinderblock wall with concertina on it. Follow that wall until you reach the main gate.”
“Got it. Thanks.” He glanced quickly at Starnes, smiled dryly, and turned so he could use his duffel bag to shut the door. 
The corporal's hand and arm relaxed, and once again became human appendages. He put his cigarette back in his mouth, shifted into first gear, and made the truck lurch forward.
The smell below the bridge
Willenbring looked down at his watch, and began to walk. He followed the bend of the creek as he was told until he came up to the steel-framed bridge described by Starnes. He slowed down and glanced at his watch. Eight and a half minutes had passed. He grinned, pleased that his travel time had beaten Starnes’ forecast. The bridge was small, maybe twenty or so feet wide and seventy five feet long, with freshly painted criss-cross steel mesh side panels standing chest high. He noticed several young Korean men traveling in both directions over the bridge on bikes. As the bicycles rumbled over horizontally laid out wood planks, there was the steady rattling of metal bike fenders. He moved over to walk along the right side, as far away from the center as possible. A light breeze picked up. Over on the far side of the bridge, down by the creek bed, he saw several people with wheelbarrows, piling up heads of cabbage into a large mound on top of a tarpaulin. A few feet away were a half dozen stone vessels about five feet high and flared out at the middle. He kept moving forward, with his eyes fixed on the activity below. He wondered where they obtained the wheelbarrows, and how heavy the stone vessels were. He judged by the pace of their movement, nothing illegal was going on, but he wanted to understand what they were up to.

When he reached the end of the bridge, he caught a whiff of a smell that immediately reminded him of Vietnam. It carried notes of rotting fish and compacted fecal matter, rancid mushrooms and old tampons. It was moist, heavy and viscous. His cheeks puffed up immediately, and he clenched his stomach, forcing the air out of his body as a countermeasure. He began taking much longer steps, then finally reached the end of the bridge, immediately turning left. For the remainder of his walk, he focused on breathing through his mouth. The curtain of stench had so thoroughly penetrated him that during the walk, he drew up lists of things to do upon arrival - boiling his hat, brushing his teeth and showering, maybe even trimming his fingernails. Unconsciously, he had picked up the pace, and wound up arriving at the gate a full minute and a half earlier than he anticipated.

There were two MP’s on duty. He set down his duffel bag, and fetched his ID from his billfold, and handed it to the shorter stocky one whose name tape read Delaloza. Willenbring was convinced by the man’s name and appearance that he was Mexican. He was in fact Chippewa Indian. The chinstrap of his helmet was pulled tight, and caused two crooked buck teeth to spill into view. When he asked Delaloza how to find the quartermaster, he replied in a slow San Diego lilt with slightly accented English.
“A mile down the main paved road. Cross the railroad tracks, then look for three buildings on the left. It’ll be one of those. There’s a shuttle that goes to Camp Henry. The quartermaster is one of the stops along the way. The next one is…”
And he trailed off to look at his watch…
“Sixteen hundred. You can get it right in front of the PX.” 
Willenbring looked to where Delaloza now gestured, and saw the PX. It was the smallest among a cluster of three wood and brick buildings. He looked at his watch. It would be 45 minutes until the next shuttle. He nodded at Delaloza, and made his way along the main road. It was light grey asphalt with a single unbroken white stripe down the middle. Soldiers at Camp Libby called it the main road, but its official name was Eisenhower way, and it traced the perimeter of the camp like a nearly circular race track. Willenbring didn’t know it at the time, but he was standing in the six o’clock position, and would be headed counterclockwise.

He passed by two parked jeeps, a sandbag emplacement, and the post flagpole, but not much else for the next five minutes. He kept along the shoulder of the road, a ten foot wide patch of pale yellow dirt; chalky on the surface, but as hard as baked clay beneath. Beyond the yellow dirt was a rumpled quilt of shrubbery and grasses that reminded him of chaparral he had seen in Northern California. The Korean soil was darker though, sometimes brown, but mostly gunmetal grey, and flecked with pebbles. A bucket loader passed by just then, moving in the same direction he walked, and as it did, a still-lit cigarette flew in a perfect line drive for fifteen feet, then struck the side of a telephone pole. He walked over to where it lay, kicked some pebbles on to it to extinguish the butt completely, and picked it up to dispose of in the next trash can. His thoughts turned to the tank farm. That would be the place he would spend most of his time for the next two years as a Petroleum Analyst. He wondered if the NCO’s there were any good at taking samples. He wondered about the sort of equipment they used in the lab, and whether or not they had a system for double-checking each other’s calculations. After a short while, his attention turned back to the god awful smell by the bridge, and he again resumed his list of disinfecting procedures. He looked forward to removing his shoes and socks, and taking a hot shower.

But he would need to see Jewitt first, to get his quarters squared away. Jewitt was the name printed on the paperwork he carried in his duffel bag. It was a strange name. He wondered if it was perhaps Jewish. At the rank of staff sergeant, Willenbring was comfortably in the midpoint of his military career. Jewitt would consider this before assigning quarters to him. Probably. In places like Camp Libby, it was a smart idea to be quartered far away from the lower ranking enlisted men. Two years in Alaska gave him ample firsthand knowledge of how young enlisted men are affected by long periods of boredom and isolation, and he wanted no part of it.
Fuckin’ Jewitt
First sergeant Jewitt spoke at you like a carnival barker. He had rotated in from Fort Campbell a year ago, a bow-legged lifer from the 101st airborne, coming up on twenty years in the service, and suffering from all manner of ailments: torn ACL, rheumatoid arthritis, sciatica, clogged arteries, baggy fucking eyes, chronic halitosis, irritable bowel syndrome. He constantly had a Stanley thermos filled with hot black coffee on standby, and every question he asked was prefixed with YOU! Or alternately, YOU -- NUMB NUTS! -- or some variation thereof. It was a detail that made him uniformly disliked across Camp Libby. Jewitt was forty two years old, but looked like he could be someone’s great grampa. When he saw sergeant Willenbring walk into the quonset hut with his duffel bag, he stood up right away from his desk, cup of coffee in his right hand, and pointing with his left finger.

“YOU -- NEW FUCKING GUY!” 
“First sergeant Jewitt?” said Willenbring. He closed the door behind him, and walked up to Jewitt’s desk. 
“You’re the NEW GUY, right? In from FORT LEE?” 
“Right.” he said flatly. Something about Jewitt made him nervous. He was like an intricate machine that had been damaged in some small irreparable way. 
“Delaloza, FUCKIN’ COMANCHE INDIAN. Just called me from the gate. Told me you’d be by. Gotch’er PAPERWORK here.” He grabbed a clipboard with some papers on it, and handed them to Willenbring. “You’ll be with uh… AW SHIT, FUCKIN’ SCHLARB. Well, at least you’ll be away from them fuckin’ SECOND I.D. BROKE DICKS.” 
Willenbring was relieved. A little. Though he didn’t ask anyone about Schlarb, he was intent to find out more about him at his earliest convenience. He spent the next ten minutes signing various forms, and jotting down notes about where to go to get ration cards and bedding. He had to resist the urge to attempt small talk with Jewitt, so as not to trigger him unpredictably. When the paperwork was done, he shared a jeep back toward the gate with him -- in complete silence -- then headed to his quarters, located in a cluster of cinder block buildings, adjacent to the PX. Sergeant Schlarb was not there, but by the looks of the room, was reasonably neat. Later that evening, Willenbring met him at the mess hall. He was shy and extremely tall, about six foot eleven. Schlarb was a Pittsburgh native with two passions in life: motorcycles and pinball.
The Enlisted Men
Over the course of the next few weeks, Willenbring had the opportunity to meet a few dozen of the lower ranking enlisted men, usually at the mess hall, but sometimes at the PX. Most were second infantry division troops, on loan from Camp Saber for some shit detail like digging a hole or building an entrenchment. Others were off duty military police. At the PX, these men all bought the same useless crap: decks of cards, cigarettes, hunting knives, titty magazines, car magazines, and zippo lighters. They reminded him of Starnes - the white ones, anyway. The white guys always had lousy moustaches. They owned two, maybe three proper sets of civilian clothing, actual shirts with buttons, and real shoes with real socks. The black soldiers were different. They had more clothes, more accessories. As soon as last formation was dismissed, they were half way out of their fatigues, and into their outfits, which they liked to pronounce as alfits. They’d walk into town with scarves and hats and bracelets, and some of them even wore shoes with heels. They almost all had nice teeth, and generally took better care of themselves.

Standard issue OG-107 fatigues consisted of the following: white t-shirt, black belt, black combat boots, olive drab green shirt jacket, field jacket, soft field cap, and trousers. Trouser bottoms were bloused and tucked into boots, which of course, were always expected to be polished and laced through every eyelet. The field cap was different than the one I would wind up wearing many years later. It was more pointed toward the front, similar to the one still in use by the marine corps. Most military bases in South Korea at that time, Camp Libby among them, had no female troops, no military dependents, no gigantic commissaries (yet) stocked with twelve types of sliced bread, no record stores, no basketball courts or swimming pools or movie theaters, not even a lousy pinball machine.

In the evenings and weekends, the men would head straight to the NCO club. The club had a jukebox, a pool table, and a few dart boards - the really heavy kind with plush felt fabric on the black parts of the face. There was also a color tv which showed re-broadcasted baseball and football games, courtesy of the AFKN (Armed Forces Korea Network). Along one of the walls, there was a column of diner-style booths with high backs, and on the other was a bar counter with round stools. Although the place was kept immaculately clean, it always smelled like salty hamburger lettuce.

The younger men usually arrived first, and left last. They would sit together in booths with pitchers of budweiser, and trade stories about trips to the beach, or a strange rumor they heard about the DMZ while up at Camp Saber. They’d eat hamburgers and french fries, and play endless games of pool and cards - mostly hearts. After the cards, they would play drinking games, and argue about topics that nobody really gave a rat’s ass about -- like which sports team’s curse was more long lasting: the Boston Red Sox or the Chicago Cubs. And these types of arguments would continue for an hour or so, until a smaller group of young men, the ones who DID GIVE a rat’s ass about sports curses, would break off. And these men would saunter outside of the club and walk off post, where they would continue to drink beer, but in a local place. Within two hours, these men would be brawling. Twenty minutes later, they would get clobbered by a jeep full of MP’s responding to a phone call about drunk Americans fighting in a bar.

The enlisted men could sometimes be very creative. For example, perhaps during one of the major holidays like Thanksgiving, one of them might find himself on guard duty at the motor pool on a noiseless moonlit night. And he would begin to think of his girlfriend back home in the Quad Cities. And after an hour or so of that, the man would look around to make sure no one could see what he was doing, and open up his field jacket and uncap a small bottle of Jim Beam he had brought with him. And he’d take a small sip, cap the bottle, and stash it back in his pocket. After five minutes, the sips would become more frequent. Within ten minutes, the bottle would remain uncapped, and there would be no more sipping, just gulping. And at some point during the night, after the bottle was done, the man would go behind a tree, remove his pants and underwear, sit on the barrel of his rifle and start jerking off. But the rifle would get stuck. And the man would panic because the rifle had live rounds in it. And he would call to his buddy to come over, please, to help him out. And the buddy would arrive, but he would have no choice but to call the medics. And then the medics would arrive, take this poor young man to the infirmary, and safely remove the rifle from his anus. And the doctor on duty would call the first sergeant. And there would be several uncomfortable descriptions and questions and pauses, followed up with an official blotter report that would have to be typed up by whoever was at the CQ desk. And on one such evening, sergeant Willenbring was at the CQ desk.

~ 1980 -- Bollingbrook day school was a private K-12 where Judy Weiss sent her fourteen year old daughter. They had a lower and upper school, each with a principal and vice principal, all of whom were credentialed with master’s degrees. At minimum. Dr. Boschen, the principal of the upper school had a PHD from Harvard -- which my mom always pronounced as Harbor. Total enrollment was 254 students, and each grade had just one class. There were two colored students and one oriental.

In 1979, the tuition was a little over five thousand dollars a year per student which was one fourth the cost of the house I lived in. My father was a staff sergeant, and made twenty four thousand dollars a year - a bit more when you factored in TDY and the army's housing allowance. After my mom's life-changing ride in Judy Weiss's Jaguar, she became convinced that I would have to attend. In the fall of 1980, that’s exactly what happened. To help afford it, my mom quit her job at Weiss's, and got a higher paying full-time job as a bank teller with Bank of America. She continued doing seamstress work on the side for Judy on a per-job basis. My dad took on a part time job as a salesman in the Craftsman tools department of Sears at Walnut Mall. When the topic would come up with family and friends, he was quick to mention the store discount -- that, and the fact that Craftsman stood by the quality of their products, no questions asked. He got dead serious when talking about the no questions asked part, and would repeat it to you in a slower voice to really let it sink in, evoking a reverence you might associate with the raising of the flag at Iwo Jima.

I entered Bollingbrook in the second grade in 1980. The school demanded a high level of participation from the families of students, which in 1980, meant a substantial level of disruption to our established routines. My mother had exactly nothing in common with any mother in that school. Right off the bat, there was the issue of transportation -- just getting to and from school. My mother had to get a driver’s license specifically to handle this, and then make friends with a few other families to arrange for carpooling. She had to learn how to pronounce car pool. We took turns with two families: the Shavitz’s and the Nowery’s. My father had to provide a ten minute executive summary of the history of the Jewish people to my mother to minimize the chances of her saying something stupendously insensitive to one of the Shavitz's. He had to buy a moped so he could free up the car for my mom. There were odd school supplies, an endless stream of permission slips to read and sign, parent teacher conferences to attend, and fees for special trips and activities completely foreign to my parents. Every thursday was dress up day, where the boys had to wear jackets and ties, and the girls had to wear dresses.

Things were more clear cut for me. The second grade was primarily devoted to the pursuit of a couple high-value objectives. For starters, I had to prove myself academically to a small cadre of teachers and administrators who were on my mother’s enemies list. Mrs. Lee, the principal of the lower school was at the top of that list. She towered over my mother standing five foot ten - a slender woman with short black hair and a flabby back. Over the summer, when we came in for a family interview, my mother became convinced that she thought of us as berry berry row krass. My mom had to remind Mrs. Lee a few times that my dad was an enlisted man. The polite way to convey this in the military is to jokingly say my husband works for a living. I think my mother fed her that line three times on the day we came in. Each time my mother corrected her, Mrs. Lee would smile and nod, then repeat the mistake a few minutes later.

Second, I had to fit in with my classmates, and make friends. One of my first memories involves an encounter with Chad Knowles. He was the toughest kid in the class, and up until he was instructed not to do so, would actually wear white t-shirts to school with a deck of cards rolled up in one of the sleeves, pretending they were cigarettes. He wore jeans and a denim jacket almost every day, along with a set of dog tags. His dad was an ex-green beret, which explained why Chad was always talking about military history and war movies. The first time we met was my first week of school, when we had a run-in in the boys bathroom. I walked in as he was coming out. He slowed down as he walked by me on my left side, and looked right at me without saying a word, then walked right back in. I don’t remember the exact way he explained things to me, but he said he’d need to punch me as a test, and that I shouldn’t tell anyone about it.
“Where do you have to hit me?” I asked. 
“In the chest or the back. You pick.” 
“Back.” 
“OK, turn around.” 
“Are you gonna’ hit me as hard as you can?” 
“Naw, it’s just a test. Don’t worry.”
I tensed up and held my breath in, confident that I could take the hit. I heard him take a step or two backwards, then lunge at me from behind. The punch landed kind of high up in the upper right part of my back.
“Aw man, you hit hard!” I said, playing a delicate balance between acknowledging the power of his punch, but also not admitting to being hurt. He smiled. 
“You’re OK man. “ he said, grinning.
 Then he turned back to add just one more thing, smiling.
“Are you a wetback?” 
“I don’t know.” I said, also smiling.
Clearly, I was in. When I returned to my classroom, I didn’t mention anything about the punch, but wondered what a wetback was. I thought of our run-in in the bathroom, and concluded that it must’ve been a nickname for people of unusual toughness who passed that test. At school during lunch, Chad waved me over to where he sat in the cafeteria to explain a game they all played at recess called smear-the-queer. It involved a group of players huddling up in a circle with one person designated as the ball tosser. The football is tossed high up in the air, and one person - anyone with the guts to do so - had to catch it or pick it up off the ground. That’s the queer. Everyone else had to run after and tackle the queer until a fumble is forced. If a fumble happens, someone else has to grab the ball to become the new queer. That’s how it worked.
“So what’s the point?” I asked.
“Whaddya mean? You wanna’ not get tackled.” he said.
“I mean, isn’t it kind of cool to be the one with the ball? If you’re fast?” Right? Was I missing something? I didn’t want to tell Chad, but it seemed to me that being the queer was the coolest position - as long as you didn’t get tackled. He looked at me like I was a retard, so I didn’t push it. We spent the rest of lunch talking about tv shows.
Chad was without a doubt, the best improvisational storyteller I ever knew, and loved to recount the missions his dad would go on in Vietnam. To this day, I’m not sure if he made up all or parts of those stories, but to me, it didn’t matter. He always had us on the edge of our seats. Chad had an older brother, Mo, who wound up getting expelled from school before I started attending. Mo went to military school somewhere in northern Virginia, and passed along horror stories of beatings and hazing rituals to Chad, who in turn, would retell them in graphic detail to scare the piss out of whoever was listening.

On the same day I became friends with Chad, I also became friends with Flynn. His mom was the girl's PE teacher at the school, and wore a whistle around her neck at all times. She liked to wear a white canvas baseball cap with the bill pulled down low. Flynn was a natural athlete; the best at catching a ball, throwing a ball, the last one standing during dodgeball, and absolutely uncatchable.

One day at recess, while being chased by Jamie Zoldark during smear-the-queer, he turned himself all the way around at full speed so that he was running backwards. I observed this all from a hundred feet away where I had stopped to catch my breath. Flynn easily parried the other boy's attempts at grabbing him by zig zagging like an NFL running back. I had never seen a nine year old boy move like that. He had the footwork of Sugar Ray Leonard. He shuffled his shoulders and head to feint in one direction, only to accelerate in the other, all the while doing crazy ball fakes like the Harlem Globetrotters. On one of the zig zag maneuvers, Jamie nearly grazed Flynn.
"I GOT YOU!" Jamie's face was red.
"No you didn't!" It was a cheerful retort.
Jamie stiffened up with both his fists balled up tightly, and twirled around once dramatically before freezing in place. He stood very still, tears rolling down his face, both hands slammed down by his sides. He raised his right arm and pointed a finger at Flynn as he let loose a barrage of words I couldn't understand, which spiraled into uncontrollable sobbing. Snot ran from his nose down to his mouth, and sprayed out in a cascade of incomprehensible curses. All the while, Flynn just jogged slowly in circles around the other boy, palming the football at him and pulling it back. Jamie's mouth was wide open. His right arm stupidly hung in the air with a single finger pointed at Flynn, whose footwork had slowed to a shuffle. He approached Jamie with the ball outstretched, this time no ball fakes, no taunting. Jamie continued to wail, but the hand with the pointed finger relaxed into an open palm, ready to receive the ball.

When the boys were maybe 3 feet apart, Flynn made a sudden darting motion with his head and hawked a loogie right into Jamie's wide open mouth - dead center mass, a fucking bullseye. Then without turning, he accelerated into his backward trot and glared at Jamie as he let out a few bursts of high pitched laughter. The mouth shot was extraordinary, something out of a Looney Tunes cartoon. Jamie's reaction was swift: he fell to the ground as if hit by a round from a 50 caliber machine gun. He writhed around coughing and spitting for all of half a second, then shot up to his feet, and charged full steam at Flynn. Flynn was still running backwards, and allowed Jamie to close the distance to about 10 feet. He started in on the zig zagging and ball pumps, then turned around so that he was facing forward, and sped away like it was nothing. His feet moved insanely fast, and he kicked up a trail of dust clouds. Jamie sped up too, but couldn’t even come close to matching Flynn. Poor Jamie ran around in large figure eights for at least five minutes, like a malfunctioning robot, just screaming and pointlessly throwing his arms around. I felt bad for him, but not too bad. During gym class earlier that week, he threw a volley ball as hard as he could right into Flynn’s face.

~ 1980 -- Very few, if any, of our Petersburg neighbors were aware of the existence of Jaguar as a maker of luxury automobiles. They were not aware that the brand was widely perceived by some people to be a clear step up from a Mercedes. Maybe not in terms of price, but definitely in terms of class. My mother was absolutely convinced that if you drove a Jaguar, you were berry berry hi krass. You had reached the tippy top of material success, and demonstrated that you not only had refined taste, but also exhibited the sort of restrained and ironic temperament of folks who have so much money, they actually hide it in plain sight by buying shit that’s so nice, ordinary people don't recognize how fabulous it is. She was of course, basing this on exactly one experience.

Judy Weiss was the owner of the only upscale department store in all of Petersburg, and drove a Jaguar XJ12. The store was eponymously named, and located close by Thalimer’s at the Walnut Mall on Crater road. My mom worked as a seamstress three days out of the week, and was paid two dollars an hour. She was very conscious of the fact that she was the only non-white employee at Weiss’, and did her best to stand out, but not so much as to draw attention to her slower coworkers. Judy was friendly with all of the ladies at the store, but took a special liking to my mom. I didn’t understand why, but I could see that Mrs. Weiss genuinely liked my mother, and that made me like her. Judy was an attractive redhead in her forties, well educated, with a superb sense of style. She enjoyed gossiping with the ladies at the store, and told dirty jokes when customers weren’t around. Although she worked six days out of the week, she occasionally took long lunches that turned into short work days, so she could play doubles tennis with her husband Armand. It kept her in good shape, and explained what my mom described as a great hourglass figure for dresses, just like Sophia Loren in Houseboat. My mom was a wizard at movie-themed similes. Ninety nine percent of the time, they were merely accurate. One percent of the time, they were so dead on, it was like some next level Buddhist Koan shit that jilted you into a higher understanding. She seemed to have one ready to go for any occasion. In Judy’s case, the Sophia Loren comparison was accurate and obvious to anyone. Judy had an ass like a fucking shelf, and her tits were like a pair of cornbread-fed juggernauts.

One day, my mom accompanied Judy on an errand. She needed to go pick up her teenage daughter from school for an orthodontist appointment. My mom had never before seen a Jaguar. When she stepped in and closed the door, she immediately noticed the interior cabin was virtually noiseless. The air was cooler, and smelled faintly of leather and perfume. A thick varnish of stillness permeated and filled all the nooks and crannies. Because the car was kept in a garage year-round, the windows were immaculately clean. Judy reached over to open the glove compartment. When my mother peeked in, she saw a solitary item: a pair of brown tinted Ferrari sunglasses folded in half. The compartment itself was barren - a simple cavity that was a miniature chairless version of the cabin. Inside, there was not a scrap of lint, a loose hair, a crumb. Judy unfolded the glasses, and closed the compartment.

All of the components were gorgeously laid out. The steering wheel was upholstered in leather, and the dashboard was surrounded by dials and knobs that looked extremely heavy. Round objects that were intended to be turned had finely etched grooves, just the right depth for human fingerprints to grab hold with minimal effort and discomfort. Along the armrests were automatic gizmos and teeny tiny levers that would make things rotate or move left and right. My mom admired the controls without pressing any - not wanting to look foolish in front of Judy. She thought of how much effort must have gone into the fabrication of the car, attempting to figure out how many men, what types of skills were required to make such a thing. When the car moved, it felt like you were rolling along thousands of indestructible velvet ball bearings. If they were to drive straight off a cliff, my mom was certain that the impact of the crash would be 90 - 95% nullified - cancelled out by whatever force made the car impervious to outward acoustic and kinetic disturbances. She smiled throughout the ride, hoping it would go on and on. It was what cemented Judy’s image as berry berry hi krass.

My parents bought a beige 1980 Dodge Aspen station wagon with automatic transmission, tan interior, air conditioning, and roof rack, no side paneling for $1,738. This resulted from a scheme cooked up by my mother, in coordination with one or more of her Korean friends. It involved attending a sales and marketing luncheon and joining a club that allowed its members to purchase things like swing sets, appliances, boats, and cars at substantial discounts. The club had the following stipulations for cars:
You specify the exact make and model, along with all of the extras 
You submit your paperwork, and agree there are no do-overs
You front 100% of the cash in advance
You agree to pick up the car yourself directly from the dealership... in Detroit 
Being a generally suspicious person, my dad was not keen on the idea of joining any club. He had a contact of his own he wanted to work. Mike Novak was a sales guy at Triangle Dodge in Colonial Heights. Before becoming a car salesman, he was stationed with my dad at Fort Lee. One weekend, my parents and I went to Triangle Dodge to visit Mike. He offered the same exact car - minus the roof rack - for $3,000. My mother had been talking up the roof rack for months. Mike did not think it was that big of a feature really, and tried talking my dad out of it. My dad went cold on him. I spoke with him recently on the phone about the car episode, and he said this.

"Your mother was dead set on that roof rack. Back in those days, it was a very popular feature you know? For people transporting things they didn't want to be lugging around on the inside, it was a very nice thing to have. I was very specific with Mike. And I tell you, when he tried talking us out of the roof rack, I just soured on him. And we cut the visit short."
So on one cold Saturday morning in February, my dad got on a plane to Detroit with a $100 one-way ticket. He took a taxi from the airport to the dealer and handed the manager his paperwork from the club. After half an hour of back and forth, he wrote the guy a check for $262 in additional fees described in undecipherable legalese printed at the bottom of the papers he held, then drove back to Virginia. He stopped along the way to sleep in the way back compartment. The outside temperature was around twenty degrees. He woke up four or five hours later, continued driving, and arrived home on Sunday afternoon. After a few weeks of driving it, my mom figured out that the left front brake would lock up if you stopped too quickly, so my dad got one of his Army buddies John Schlarb to replace the caliper. This got rid of an annoying squeak, and also solved the locking-up problem permanently, and only cost us the price of a home cooked Korean dinner, a six pack of Budweiser, and ten dollars in quarters for John to go play pinball.

March, 1975 -- my dad received his transfer orders back to Fort Lee, Virginia from Korea at the tail end of January 1975. We stayed in temporary military quarters for a while, but within a few weeks, my parents had closed on a 3 bedroom brick house, just 20 minutes away, in the town of Petersburg. All cash, $20,000. It was located at 533 Kenwood Drive, and is still visible on Google maps. From the outside, it looks exactly the same now, as it did then. When my family lived there, it had three separate bedrooms, one bathroom, a living room, a kitchen, and a large family room that had been converted from a garage.

The family room was actually 3 stairs down from the rest of the house, and adjacent to the kitchen. It had wall-to-wall red shag carpeting, and wood-paneling on the walls. Originally, my mom used this room for her sewing machine and seamstress equipment. Several years later, my parents remodeled. They bought a second small tv and couch, along with a heavy duty wall unit air conditioner. My mom also bought a refurbished industrial sewing machine with cast iron parts, and a dress mannequin. She started doing side jobs, making custom curtains, dresses, and occasionally, she’d work on period costumes for people who participated in civil war reenactments. My sister and I used this room to do our homework, and to practice pro wrestling moves. I was even allowed to hook up my atari console to the new tv. The family room was the only place in the house where any of us were allowed to bring food beyond the kitchen. When the A-Team debuted in 1983, this was absolutely essential to me. It was not a big deal if I missed the very beginning of the intro -- the stock Vietnam war footage of soldiers jumping out of the Huey -- but if I were to miss the part where the screen fades to red, and the machine gun sound effects notched out the white silhouette of the “A-team”, I’d be in a bad mood for the next ten minutes. In my mind, whoever thought up that little bullet-inspired flourish was one of the greatest creative minds of the twentieth century.

Adjoining the family room was the laundry room, which my mom pronounced as the non-dooree-room. It was a ten by ten cement floor room that, in addition to laundry, was used for adhoc storage. It had a storm door that led out to the backyard. I suppose rich people up north would call this a mudroom. Because my mom thinks of herself as a crafty and resourceful immigrant, it wasn’t long before this room also became a vegetable drying and pickling area for the things she grew in the yard. The first year, she planted several rows of turnips, squash, scallions, cabbage, peppers, sesame leaves, and soy beans. My sister and I would help out as much as we could. With the easy stuff, like peppers, my mom would have us walk up and down the rows of the garden, pick whatever was ripe, and bring it all back into one of the several screened boxes my dad had built. These were twenty four inch square drying apparatuses he made from pine boards. Two of the sides had screw-in handles, and the bottom was chicken wire. They were lightweight, stackable, comfortable to hold, and easy to walk with. After hosing everything down outside, we’d let it air dry, and bring it into the non-dooree-room for my mom for further processing.  By the fall, the room was filled with several huge stone jars - grey, unpainted behemoths, twenty inches in diameter, two feet high, and weighing a minimum of 40 pounds. She had managed to buy a few from a Korean grocer somewhere close to Washington DC. Some of the jars had lids, others were topped with cheese cloth held in place by cooking twine. The room always had a pungent odor that my dad described as “spicy dog shit”. My main recollection of it was that it teemed with bugs. I didn’t mind so much, but I absolutely hated being the first one to enter, and turn the light on -- mostly out of fear that something small and squirmy would run across my hand as I ran it along the wall, looking for the light switch.

For my sister and me, the living room was the proper entrance to our world. It was where my dad would first come in when he returned from work, where we kept the Christmas tree and the television. In the days before school, when my dad arrived home from work, he’d open the screen door, then the storm door, and walk in, dressed in camouflage fatigues. My sister and I would be in front of the television, either watching Kimba the White Lion or Star Blazers. We’d stay right where we were until the storm door closed shut, then get up and run to him just as he was unlacing the top eyelets of his combat boots. We’d each hug one of his legs, then plop our butts down -- me on one foot, my sister on the other -- and lock onto him by criss crossing our feet. Then he would lumber forward into the living room toward the kitchen, in slow halting steps with each of us balanced on a foot, and he would stretch out his arms stiffly and contort his hands and make weird sounds, and that would make us laugh like crazy. On some days, he’d head over to his bedroom and lay down a while for a nap. Sometimes, my sister and I would go in and lay down with him, and we’d all fall asleep for half an hour or so. I liked being on his left side, closer to the bedroom door. I remember rubbing my forehead up against his cheek and chin. The feeling of his beard stubble made me giggle. I remember his breath and face always smelled like coffee, and his hands like gasoline.

Our house belonged to a semi-circular compound of two and three bedroom houses situated north of Blackwater swamp and west of I-95. The neighbors were a cross section of Philip Morris factory workers, military families, mechanics, truck drivers, and sewage plant workers -- predominantly white, but beginning to tilt black by the time we moved in. Some people (who were not at all very fine) didn’t appreciate the shifting demographics. Our first year there, around the time I was four years old, I remember waking up late at night, and hearing my parents open and shut the front door. My sister was too young to realize what was happening. She may have even slept through it. But I remember standing inside by the entryway with my face pressed up against the wire mesh of the screen door. I watched as the local fire department put out a burning cross that had been attached to a cherry tree out on the front lawn of the house across the street. A handful of the nearby neighbors came out of their houses, and milled around on foot to watch, huddled around the fire truck. Some of the men didn’t even bother to put on shirts.

Perry and Esther White lived closest to us. They were a colored couple, older than my parents, with three teenage daughters: La Tonya, Peedie, and Ranita. Perry drove a beer delivery truck, and during most summer weekends, I’d see him outside while I was playing in the yard, nursing a can of Budweiser in his right hand. On sunny days when he wasn’t working, he enjoyed shuttling back and forth from his barbecue grill to the shed, usually carrying something odd in his non beer-holding hand: an extension cord, a lawn jart, or a small tool for barbecuing. Most people in the neighborhood who could afford a shed had one. Perry’s was the nicest. The whole structure was the size of a very small apartment, and was propped up on wooden four by four stilts so it sat about eighteen inches up off the ground. From a quick glance, it could pass as a miniature wood-frame house. All four sides were painted white. It had a solid core wood door with a deadbolt on it, a shingled roof and two glass windows on the sides that faced our yard. From my swing set, I could examine it pretty close up, and would daydream about what it might be like to live inside of it, and to use it as a clubhouse or base of operations. On most occasions, when Perry was off from work, and felt the urge to barbecue, he wore dark brown short pants, a dark tank top underneath an open short sleeve buttoned shirt, and “shower shoes” with dark brown or black socks. On days like that, he always kept two things very close by: a flyswatter and a can of beer.

Esther was a teacher at Peabody High School - which is where the colored kids went. On nice days, she liked to wait until the sun was coming down, then sit outside on a folding beach chair next to Perry. She wore long dresses, and smoked Virginia Slims. For a few years, she would babysit me and my sister, and on those days, we’d play Uno and Backgammon. She would let us play records of the Jackson Five, and we’d sing along as best as we could. For lunch, she would let us eat Oscar Mayer hot dogs right out of the package, and she made us Ichiban brand instant ramen, which I loved. Occasionally, she would substitute in a Lipton’s cup of instant soup, which was a disappointment. In Esther’s living room, there was a thick amber glass ashtray, always filled with Hershey’s kisses and M&M’s. Esther’s oldest daughter, La Tonya, told me that the candies were for her cousins, but Esther let me reach in there, and have as much as I’d want any time we were over at the house.

All the kids I hung out with were experts at getting around the woods. Some of them called it “the creek”, but it was actually a maze of small creeks and streams that snaked through the marshes of the Blackwater swamp -- an enormous area that was a mixture of clumpy patches of swamp grass, nettles, honeysuckle, and thickets of wild berries. Scattered around at irregular intervals were large stones, and rotting tree trunks. The kids knew all sorts of things about getting around -- like which places to avoid on account of snakes, the best spots to jump streams, where to find crawdads, and how high the water could get before conditions would become unsafe. No one ever went in after a big rainstorm. There were several entry points in the neighborhood, many of which were in people’s backyards. My favorite was right by our house, where Kenwood Drive dead-ended into a dirt cul-de-sac. That’s where my dad taught my mom how to drive a stick shift. From our driveway, you’d turn left, then immediately right so you’d be standing on a paved patch of Century Drive, looking down a stretch of dirt road directly into a wall of trees. In the middle of that wall, there was a forty foot tall weeping willow, and beyond that, a rotted out wooden bridge that went over a ten foot wide creek. Once you crossed that bridge, if you turned right, you could follow the water for at least a mile. “Hey, you wanna’ go to the creek?” someone would say. And that’s all it took. On summer days, we’d go back there with beach buckets, and catch frogs, each as big as your fist. Sometimes, we’d bring nets to scoop up crawdads. Other times, we’d just keep going straight, and deep into the marshes. Once you were in, you could see a long hedge row of tall sycamores off in the distance, at least thirty feet in height. They bordered the concrete slabs and guard railings of the elevated highway. That part of I-95 ran about twenty feet above the ground, and ran roughly parallel with the swamp. Because it was easy to spot from a distance, we could always orient ourselves to it. If it was on our left and behind us, we were headed further in, and away from home. On our right, and we’d be headed back to our main entry point - the old wooden bridge.

Because so much of the ground was waterlogged, we would use long sticks to walk on top of anything we could find that looked dry -- busted up logs or dense clumps of grass, or a big oddly shaped rock. We used them like crutches and probes. If we came up to a stream, or a dark patch of water with grass poking out, we’d poke a stick in to see how deep it was, and to test for any snakes or turtles. Then we’d plunge them into the soft creek bed until they stuck, so they’d support our weight as we took vaulting leaps from one dry spot to another. Occasionally, there would be clearings, and the ground would be firm enough to walk on. In these spots, there were trees -- mostly sycamore, but some oak and pond pines. One time, we found a small wooden shanty that someone had built, hidden away in a thicket. There was no floor or door, just a single opening you could walk into, and a pitched roof of planks of old lumber. Inside, lying on the ground was a spring mattress, and scattered all around were cigarette butts, beer cans, and used up rubbers. We had no idea what the rubbers were, but we were convinced the fort was a makeout room for teenagers. I found a dirty magazine with all sorts of pictures I had never seen before. At some point, someone stepped on a huge dried up turd in the corner by the mattress. That’s when one of the older kids suggested an alternative theory. That the place we stumbled upon was actually a hidey hole for a couple of dirty hobos with nowhere to live. And that any minute, they might be back, and throw us into their shack and start doing stuff to us. We all started screaming, and hightailed it back to the bridge, not even looking backwards. I didn’t even bother to find both of my sticks.

Saturday, I accompanied babies A + B to Muji by Union Square to locate a few pens for school. Afterwards, we used the bathroom at Pottery Barn across the street. Baby A and I were sitting on a large comfy sofa, talking about whether or not we could picture this thing in the tv room, imagining how many of our family members could fit on it. A saleswoman came over to us, and said:
"Please let me know if you have any questions about this sectional."
"No questions." I flashed a big grin.  I'm just waiting for my daughter who's in the bathroom. Besides, we were just debating if this is something we'd like to put in our house."
"Oh - that is much more than just a debate! Do you have 8 feet of wall?"
I looked closely at the woman's face for hints of what she might actually mean by such a stupid-ass ingress into a conversation.
"Uh, yeah. Probably a lot more than that. That's definitely not an issue." 
She seemed to be in disbelief that I might live in a house large enough to accommodate a sofa of this magnitude.
"Where would this be going may I ask?"
"Oh... probably up on the second floor of our house."
"I was asking about the wall length because this sofa is VERY large, and actually needs a little extra room on both of the ends to be placed into a room. Many people don't have that space."
"I'm positive this could fit inside our house." 
Just then, baby B returned from the bathroom, and the three of us left the store. I explained to my daughters that when I was a boy, I would daydream of living in a store like that. Of settling into a good hiding spot just before closing time, waiting for the employees to leave, then coming out at night to jump around on the furniture.

Five minutes after our Pottery Barn bathroom break, as we entered the Union Square farmer's market, I was overcome with hunger. So I convinced the girls to turn down 16th street to hop into Breads Bakery. I had an an egg sandwich + gravlax on toast (no coffee, woodja believe?), then headed back to Union Square to go into Staples to look for additional school supplies. Below is a list of what we were looking for.

Musical notation paper
1 loose leaf notebook 
1 small binder
1 pack of 5 binder insert separators
1 pack of very small post-its

Cash transactions only - at Staples in the year 2019: we got everything on the list except for the music paper. I had never heard of such a requirement, but quietly accepted it. The total came to just under $26, and as we waited our turn to pay at the head of a line of parents and civilians, the manager announced:
"Sorry folks - cash only. We can't do credit card transactions - the machine is down."
There was the sound of grumbling behind me. One pair of older guys dressed in khakis and polo shirts immediately jumped out of line and headed for the exit. The voice of Joe Corallo from Boston, MA immediately sounded off in my head with the words Go get your fuckin' supah-visah. I didn't repeat the words, but I did reassure Norene that I had plenty of money.

After we exited Staples, I split off from my family on foot. I walked approximately 3,800 steps to the Nespresso Store at the corner of Prince and Mercer in SOHO where I picked up 8 sleeves of Ristretto pods. The woman at the register threw in a free sleeve of something with a whimsical Italian name, along with a much shorter sampler pack of stuff that looked like it was in the Nespresso version of "beta".

I called Ray's Barbershop to ask if Johnny was working. Yeah. Johnny's here right now. With my cute little Nespresso bag, I walked another mile. I crossed over Canal via Mercer, then headed along Church. I saw Johnny outside with 2 other barbers, smoking by the plate glass. I gave him a head nod, and went inside. When I sat in the chair, I instructed him to cut my hair like last time - which was at least a month earlier. During the cut, we exchanged maybe 3 lines of chitchat. This was about average for a 7 minute cut... 2 sentences every 3 minutes. I liked this about Johnny. When it was done, I went to the register to pay, received my change, and walked back to Johnny to hand him the usual tip of $12. I had been coming to him on and off for a year, and thought it was time to level up our relationship, so just asked him point blank.
"Hey Johnny, what's the best way to reach you? A couple times, I dropped by, but you weren't in."
"Just get my number from Peter." This is what Johnny always says.
"I don't think that number works man. Or maybe Peter gave me the wrong one."
"Ok - you take it now -- " 
Bingo. It took a year, but I finally got Johnny's personal cell phone number.

Beginning ~ 2012, I started maintaining lists of many things. One such list was A comprehensive list of stupid f***ing s*** that I don’t understand - updated semi-regularly. But this was a chore to write out more than once, so I attempted to shorten it. That simply did not do. I experimented with emoji substitution for the phrase. This proved totally inadequate, and it is surprisingly hard to design emoji's from scratch. So I settled for text message shorthand: ACLOSFSTIDU-USR - in all caps of course.

People who use the word “summer” as a verb (6/29/2018).
Netflix tv show writing - there is a string of Netflix shows that appear to be optimized medleys of songs, memorable scenes, and casting ensembles designed to evoke memories of movies that are in fact good. It is quite possible v1 drafts of these scripts are ghost-written by algorithms.

"Blistering takedowns" -- the usage of blistering as an intensifier here isn't fooling anyone over the age of 9. Does anyone on earth actually believe that when a celebrity offers a "blistering takedown" of another celebrity, something will change? [7/26/2017]

Dabbing -- What in the f*** is this? [1/4/2017] I believe it’s a form of touchdown celebration (eg: Cam Newton) that has morphed into a dance.

Why are many self-identifying liberals tripping over their own feet to characterize the election of ****** ***** as an inevitable consequence of the democratic party’s failure to listen to disaffected white voters and take their concerns seriously? Seems to me that this is a gross over-simplification that exonerates many terrible people, and worse, attempts to reason with millions of dip shits. What a colossal waste of resources. [12/15/2016]
Coal miners -- why does anyone believe that digging holes into the earth is a line of work worth saving? No one belly-aches over the disappearance of switch board operators, shoe shine boys, elevator operators, or farriers (specialists in equine hoof care). 

The worn-out nature of the following words and phrases: slam (verb; eg: Eric Garner’s daughter slams Clinton Campaign…); epic (adj; frequently used in non-sports headlines in conjunction with the noun "takedown"; eg: Trevor Noah delivers epic takedown of Donald Trump... Elizabeth Warren's epic takedown of Wells Fargo CEO.
People who take a knee during the playing of the national anthem as a form of protest [Oct. 19, 2016]. This isn’t a protest, it’s self-absorbed grandstanding. Taking umbrage at anything nowadays seems to be a runaway phenomenon. Focusing an intense spotlight on your outrage with the help of social media has become a form of celebrity. 

I hatched a plan one day in November many years ago, to write a book.  A week later, I realized it was not a plan at all because contained in the word “plan” is the promise of an enumerable set of steps. Wanting to write a book, was for me, a gut-level feeling; one that I took seriously, but that I knew held as much credibility as a vow to raise awareness about the dangers of over-grilling steak. I didn’t really understand why this feeling came to me, just that it felt right. It even filled me with pride at times, just for having had the ability to conceive of it. It was simple, but deeply personal; neither unrealistic nor trivial.

Six years later, around the same time of year, the writing idea cropped up again, this time as a bullet point on a list. It was a ten-item list that I emailed to myself every day. Each item was written as an affirmative declarations in the present tense, and had a deadline associated with it that I liked to place inside parentheses. This ritual was intended to signal to my subconscious that I really meant business. I’m proud to say that I did it every day for many months with extraordinary results; in every category except for my writing project. I began referring to it as my collection of stories. But as I continued with my ten-item list emails, I realized I didn’t like the sound of “my collection of stories”. So I deprecated the term, and replaced it with the much simpler sounding “my writing project”. My progress over the next 4 years was abysmal. Not a single sentence was produced. But I did see a huge spike in the completion of unscheduled gardening tasks and home repair projects.

You may realize what I’ve come to realize: that the area of memory that operates on the distant past - especially childhood - is like a magical record player that does not quite work as designed. It’s not scrubbing through video on or summoning animated vignettes of the past at will. It’s more like rifling through a junk drawer filled with photographs in a poorly lit room. And the pictures seem to have been piled up in constantly shifting configurations by an angry spouse.

In 1983 for example, I was 11 years old, and lived in the small town of Petersburg, Virginia. It was a 3 bedroom brick home located at 533 Kenmore drive - roughly 1,600 square feet by my estimate. Ronald Reagan was president, but I could remember having seen images of Gerald Ford on TV. Those images, I now think, made me feel sad. But there is a small chance that I feel that way only because it’s possible they weren’t actually images of Ford, they were replayed images of Nixon leaving the White House.

When I was 4, I also remember the way my dad would walk through the door from work. He would come home from the army base, still dressed in his fatigues at around the same time every day - right around the time Kimba the Lion would come on tv. My sister and I would get up from the tv, and run to him just as he was unlacing the top eyelets of his combat boots. We’d each hug one of his legs, then plop our butts down - me on one boot, my sister on the other - and we’d lock on to him by criss- crossing our feet around his legs. Then he would lumber forward into the living room toward the kitchen, with each of us balanced on a foot. Sometimes, he would stretch out his arms like a zombie and contort his hands and make weird sounds, and that would make us laugh like crazy. Carmen usually fell off before me because she was two and a half years younger than me.

As a kid, I observed my dad use certain phrases over and over again. He was an incredible recycler of narrative elements. One turn of phrase he got a lot of mileage out of was “in the grand scheme of things…” I never really thought about our neighborhood in the grand scheme of things until one day, I was confronted with the wealth gap between my family and the families of my classmates. Everyone in my neighborhood shopped at Sears and JC Penny, and we’d occasionally run into eachother at Shoneys’ all you can eat breakfast buffet. We lived next to Perry and Esther White. 

Regarding our house, the only thing I remember about moving in, was my sister and I running and sliding on the glass-like surface of the freshly varnished hardwood floors. Sometimes we would crash into the baseboard heaters. There was also a ceiling attic with a retractable folding staircase. On a different day, I remember being outside in the backyard next to the garbage cans with my dad. I hadn’t yet learned English. There was a small hole in the grass, a bit bigger than a golf divot, and the perfect size for a 3 year old’s foot to nestle into. I jabbed my foot in and out of that hole a few times while my dad walked around inspecting various items around the yard. After a minute or so of that, I pulled my pants down, and peed in the hole. I wanted to fill it up like a little swimming pool. My dad picked me up, half laughing, and mouthed a whole bunch of words in English that I don't remember. A short while later - a month, a year maybe - I flushed an apple core down the toilet.

When I was about 9, my dad showed me how to operate the weed whacker. I remember my dad always wanting to explain things on a molecular goddam level, and boring the fuck out of me by the time he reached the third sentence. I remember the constant smell of gasoline, and the deafening noise of crickets coming from his tool shed beginning at sundown. I remember the creepy crumpled in aluminum shed that used to house the lawn mower and tools - the one that I swore I had seen a black widow spider in one time when my dad told me to go get him something. And one time, very late at night, I remember waking up to the sound of sirens and seeing the burnt remains across the street of a cross that had been lit on fire by some local members of the KKK.

He drove around in a Dodge Colt, which he bragged “had 150,000 miles on it, and may just reach half a million”. It wasn’t until the year 2011 that I finally figured out exactly what the interior of the car smelled like - a greasy hammer.

I also remember gas rationing, trips to the PX and commissary at Fort Lee, and the fourth of July fireworks that celebrated the release of the 51 American hostages who were held in Iran for 100 days. I remember my dad being cautiously optimistic that Ronald Reagan was the new president. I remember Love Boat and Fantasy Island, and Dance Fever and Gilligan’s Island and Hogan’s Heroes. Saturday mornings were the absolute best. There was Kroft Superstars - Sigmund the Sea Monster, Space 1999, Ultraman, Godzilla and Godzookie, Superfriends, Trollkins, Dungeons and Dragons.

One day, I brought a rubber ball to school called a Moon Bouncer. The moon bouncer was a ten cent ball I got at a department store called Mason's. Mason’s offered an eclectic mix of toys, garments, and essential school supplies such as the trapper keeper. It was the store that my mom did the staple of our back to school shopping - though that phrase held no currency in our small world back in 1980. People didn’t call shopping for school supplies “back to school shopping”. It was just shopping. Anyhow, let me get back to the specifics of this ball. I recall one day, walking by the light-up toy kid rides in the front of the store a wacky picture on the side of a gumball machine. The picture depicted a pink or green ball (I can’t remember which) bouncing from some point of origin within the continental United States, all the way up through the atmosphere, into outerspace, and finally planting itself into a crater on the surface of the moon. That picture in and of itself, was what sold me. I was 100% convinced that the ball could not possibly travel to space. But I was also intrigued by the possibility that the ball, in the right hands, might be made to defy the laws of physics. The name itself - moon bouncer - imbued the ball with extraordinary possibilities. Maybe it wasn’t far fetched to think that the scientists who synthesized the material were maybe on to something, and imbued this object with With a name like moon bouncer, surely it contained some exotic space-age material that made it capable of reaching extraordinary heights.

The morning temperature climb was beginning to accelerate, so I removed my jacket, and stuffed it into one of the side saddle bags. Still sitting, I reached into my pocket for my phone, pressed some buttons, and gave myself a "10" rating on my mood recording app. I looked at the words on the screen - "Avatar State" - it was the first perfect score I had ever awarded myself.

I was smiling when I left Choice. I disengaged the electrical assist, then grabbed my coffee out of the cup holder with my right hand. To keep the ride spill-free, I made sure to keep the bike in a high gear, causing me to peddle against resistance at a low speed. I continued that way for half a mile along Clifton street until I reached Von King Park. As usual, I turned right at the 88th precinct on Tompkins, then continued until Madison Street.

The sun was now beaming, and the morning moisture that had felt so wonderful, was about to slip away. A light breeze would occasionally pick up that was just strong enough to rustle the leaves high up in the trees that stood on both sides of Madison street. When this would happen, I'd stop peddling, and just coast along so I could listen.

As I made my way past the halfway point of Madison, between Lewis and Stuyvesant, I started looking closely at house numbers. Their's was 595, so it would be on the left. The block was a nice mix of well-preserved or renovated brownstones, a few poorly executed fixer-uppers, and an eclectic smattering of respectable DIY projects; a bit more varied than my block - probably because of a much wider income distribution of the home owners.

I used to be forced to write by my English teacher Mr. Baker. He had bright red hair styled in a neatly kept combover, not too shaggy really, and wore a lot of pattern-printed clothing: plaid pants, plaid jackets, paisley ties, argyle sweaters, houndstooth trousers, you name it. He was like a golfer from the 25th century, attempting to dress like someone from the distant past. Maybe Mr. Baker thought highly of patterns. Maybe they were the fashion. I say maybe because I was eleven years old, and in the seventh grade; not too plentiful in the area of original ideas. Still just picking up on, processing, and cataloging the prevailing attitudes of my world. The year was 1984, and I lived in a town called Petersburg, Virginia.

The school I attended was called Bollingbrook. It was a good private school that had exactly 254 students in grades K-12. That is, there was a total of 254 students, and each grade had one class. It was not a Catholic school, though we did play lots of intramural sports with Catholic school kids. There were lots of children of well-to-do families that lived in Colonial Heights. Usually, the fathers had occupations that sounded like elaborate practical joke punchlines - like orthodontists. My mom thought the world of orthodontists. Most likely because one or two of them drove around in Jaguars. Very few people in the town of Petersburg were aware that Jaguars are made in Europe. A Jaguar is a clear step up from a Mercedez. Maybe not in price, but definitely in terms of class. When you own a Jaguar, you have so much class oozing out of your fingertips, you don't need to club people over the head with the obvious - like a Mercedez. There was a girl: Margaret Ann Baxter - whose mom donated $100,000 to the school one year. Apparently, that amount of money was quite large, and it entitled the Baxter family to quite a bit of input on the internal goings on of the school. To wit, I had to spend a good portion of the fifth grade sitting in a corner, away from all of the other kids.

One day, I brought a rubber ball to school called a Moon Bouncer. The moon bouncer was a ten cent ball I got at a department store called Mason's. But with a name like moon bouncer, surely it contained some exotic space-age material that made it capable of reaching extraordinary heights. They had a number of gumball and toy machines toward the exits. I used to stick my nose into the slots where the gumballs would come out of, and just breath in that glorious smell. I actually believed that I was the only kid in the whole world who ever came upon the idea to do that.

We exited the house at 7:36am this morning - 16 minutes later than we had the day before. There would be no time for the playground this morning. We would go directly to school. The girls had each picked a game to bring to their classrooms. Maya packed Selection. Charlotte chose Scrabble. W packed up the bike in short order, and headed out - down Throop Avenue, then left on DeKalb. Right as we got into Fort Greene, and as we passed Waverly, I decided to turn right on Vanderbilt to take the Flushing Avenue route to the Manhattan bridge. This is something I hadn't done in more than a year. Only because I'm convinced that Dekalb to Navy Street is faster by 2 minutes. Anyway, I reasoned that because the weather was so beautiful, we'd take this one-time detour just to go by our old apartment on Vanderbilt and Myrtle. We made it to Flushing, made the left turn, and were headed down the straightaway toward Navy Street, when I became acutely aware of all the gravel the bike was kicking up. There was some kind of half-assed construction zone that was partially restricted with a few dozen cones, and some of the debris had seeped into the bike lane. Not that much really, mostly loose gravel. For some reason, this worried me. So I slowed down just a bit, then nailed the corner lip of one of those large metal rectangles used to flatten out large sections of asphalt when crews do road repairs. I managed to avoid hitting it with my front wheel, but the back tire caught it directly on the corner at the worst possible point of impact. Not even ten seconds later, I noticed a drop in air pressure in the back, slowed down a lot, then came to a stop. We had a flat, and it was 7:50am. I had the girls get off the bike, and did a few quick calculations in my head:

We were at least 2 miles from PS 130. A cab would take a minimum of 10 minutes to get to us, then another 15 minutes to negotiate bridge traffic and reach school. I needed to secure the bike to something, somewhere. We were 3 blocks away from Propel Bikes, and they open at 8am. The time was now 7:54am.

We rolled up to the shop at a minute to 8. I saw Elon sitting on the sidewalk below the shaded canopy of construction scaffolding right in front of Navy Green. I called Pratt car service to find out that there were no available cars. Elon suggested that I leave the bike with him, but just as I was about to reply, I noticed Chris approach the door to the shop on his bike. He figured out what was going on, and invited me in. He said he could patch the tire really fast, and told Elon "Our priority is to get Ben back on his bike." The statement was oddly inspirational, and I wondered if the girls noticed that Chris was speaking with military bearing.

Surprisingly, they did fix the flat very fast. I decided to buy the much better quality marathon plus tire, and Chris offered to just charge me for the tire itself, and provide the labor for free on the flat. This was very cool of him. We got to school at 8:37am.

It's been nearly 3 weeks of consistent running with long weekend runs of 8.5 and 8.7 miles. Tomorrow - sunday - will be a long run of 7-9 miles. Since about Nov. 5, I've been trying to maintain a weekly running schedule of at least 20 miles. 

There's a great point during my training where I feel like I've crossed the first threshold to kicking off some decent training - which is: being able to run 5 miles, and have it feel like it's nothing.

I hope to be able to designate Wednesday or Thursday as a quality run day of between 4 - 7 miles. Here are some ideas of speed workouts that have worked out well for me in the past.

Being able to do multiple 7 mile runs throughout the week - with a few strides mixed in - without feeling too wiped out to also handle a full training load of jiu jitsu, and still do a quality tempo run.

Norene is using a boxcutter to hollow out a box for Charlotte. Maya is singing. And Charlotte is on her computer.

On Friday morning, I went for a walk along my usual route: down Putnam, right on Marcy, one lap around the park, then past Little Roy cafe. I grabbed a coffee, just before a line of people began to form, then headed back home. Just after passing the 88th precinct, I heard a voice come at me from inside a dumpster.

“Yo old man – you got some m&m’s?”

Total silence on my part – not even a turn of the head or a break in my gait. Just a quick dart of my eyeballs in the direction of the voice as I brought the coffee to my mouth for a sip. The sound came from a banged up container ten feet to my left. It was one of the tall ones you see outside of buildings that are being demo’ed. I kept walking. Probably some construction worker just messing around.

Two or three houses later on the same block, the voice came again – “Old man, I’m talkin’ to you!” – this time from right behind me. I turned around, fully expecting someone to take a swing at me. Part of me hoped that would happen. The quarantine was so boring – and I missed training jiu jitsu. I took a few quick shuffle steps forward just to put some distance between me and the voice, put my hands up to my chest, then pivoted around sharply, still holding my coffee in my right hand, ready to throw it in someone’s face if necessary. The thought of having to waste a $4 beverage after only drinking two or three sips increased my irritation. 

“Damn SON – I ‘aint tryin’ to roll you or nuthin! Calm down. I just want some m&m’s.”
“Hold on. Aren’t you uh… Justin Bieber?”
“Sh-sh-sh!! Keep your voice down! And just keep walkin’ that way. We’ll conversate while we move.”
I didn’t budge. Just looked at the person in front of me. Trying to figure out if there were hidden cameras somewhere, or if I was hallucinating, or if there could be some other explanation. He clearly saw I was confused, and walked over to me with his hands up and open, in a gesture of neutrality. I gripped my coffee, with my sights locked in on his nose and eyes like a bullseye. I 

“You look exactly like that punk Justin Bieber. Who are you?”

With his hands still up, he walked slowly toward me, and started mumbling words I couldn’t understand. Then his eyes rolled up into the back of his skull, and all I cold see were the white parts. I took a step back with my coffee, and squinted my eyes because it seemed like his head was glowing red. Then his voice got louder, and I could make out these words…

“I'm at a party I don't wannna be at. 
And I don't ever wear a suit and tie..
Wonderin' if I could sneak out the back
Nobody's even lookin' me in my eyes
Then you take my hand
Finish my drink, say, "Shall we dance?" Hell, yeah –

And then everything went white. I wasn’t sure if my eyes were closed or open, but when I could see things again, Justin Bieber and I were in a white windowless room the size of a kindergarten class. There were no doors, and we both sat at a white table atop white chairs, facing eachother. Somehow, all of my clothes - my jeans, shirt, sneakers – had turned white. I looked down at my right hand, and saw that I was still gripping my coffee. The cup, along with the lid and the cardboard thermal sleeve were also white. I looked over at Justin. He was now wearing a white tuxedo with patent leather criss-crossing bandoliers. On the bandoliers were tiny white cylinders that looked like travel-sized under arm deodorant.

“Ok, what the hell is this?” I said, as calmly as possible.

“You’re not ready for me to tell you the truth. But let’s just say – we’re above where we were a moment ago.”

“Above… why are you talking like that?”

“Like what?”
“Like your voice idiot! Like somehow you managed to get a phd in astrophysics, and learned how to pronounce words correctly!”

“Calm down SON!” He leaned in a bit, and propped up his eyebrows, looking right into my eyes.

“Arright, that’s better. “ I said. Then leaned back in my chair and took a sip of my coffee. “Tell me what is going on.”

“I’ve been sent by my people – ”

“Your people? What does that mean?”

“I’ll get to that, don’t worry.” His phd had returned, and he was talking as Dr. Bieber again, but this time, it wasn’t so alarming. “I’m a scout, sent by my people to make a few adjustments to things that are… difficult to explain, but extremely important.”

“I thought you were just some singer who made it a profession to say dumb things on the internet. Who are your people? And can you just try be very a whole lot more precise when you talk about adjustments? What does that mean? And where are we exactly?”

“I suppose I’ll just need to show you.” Then he stood up, and pressed a button underneath the table. It seemed to trigger music. Then Justin started singing.

“What do you mean? Oh, oh
When you nod your head yes, but you wanna say no
What do you mean? Hey, yeah
When you don't want me to move, but you tell me to go
What do you mean? Oh, what do you mean?
Said you're runnin' outta time, what do you mean?
Oh, oh, oh, what do you mean?
Better make up your mind, what do you mean?”

And then he stopped and looked directly at me. 

“I’m a time traveler SON. From the future. And I’m here to correct some song lyrics which, if left in their current state, could do irreversible harm to the galaxy as we know it.” He pointed at the wall behind me. When I turned to look, there was a floor to ceiling monitor where the wall once was. 

“Uh, is that what I think it is?”

“Water, yes. Sea water more specifically. We’re in the deepest part of the Marianas trench – “

“Challenger Deep.”

“Bingo. Hold up a sec, lemme’ summon my android.” He pressed another button. A moment later, Ariana Grande walked in through a portal that appeared out of nowhere on what was a moment ago, a solid white wall. I strained to look – to see if I could make out any details of what was on the other side, but it was just too dark.

To the people of the future -- I would like to persuade you of a not so simple thing regarding Roger Willenbring. Let me be clear. I call him my father, though he is not exactly that. I believe that at one point, we were colleagues, or perhaps I was his assistant. He and I may have been rivals, or he may have been my predecessor. When I think of him, I alternately call him “dad” or “my predecessor”. As I said, it’s not so simple. Not now. Prior to February 27, 2018, I believe things were… different. How so, I can’t say. But in February, I became aware all at once, that at some point during his lifetime, Roger Willenbring developed the ability to effectuate quantum entanglement (aka: action at a distance). I don’t understand how he acquired the ability, whether there are side-effects, or if there exist any dangers that may arise from talking about it. I’m not even sure if he consciously controls or directs it, but after February 27, 2018, it became as clear as day that it is real, and he’s somehow altered my past and future. My theory is -- and I know this will sound crazy -- he travelled back in time to become my father. 

This narrative is my best effort to date, of enumerating all the relevant facts surrounding my claim: that Roger Willenbring, an ordinary looking white man of average height and build, a Minnesotan, the oldest son of an alcoholic, a God fearing Christian, a euthanizer of rabbits during his youth, and former door to door donut salesman, husband, father, soldier, dabbler in various engineering disciplines, and enthusiastic debunker of conspiracy theories -- is in fact, a being of immense power, capable of altering reality simply by speaking words. 

Anyone who knows Roger Willenbring would say that he’s different, even weird. When I’m among friends for example, and say “Look, my father is really different, then release a few choice anecdotes, many of the smart college types will tilt their heads slightly, narrow their eyes, and say I get it. Oh boy, they certainly do not fucking get it. They’ll say something along the lines of… “He sounds super smart. Though definitely salt of the earth type. Reminds me of my uncle Ray. Probably special ops, maybe CIA, but really humble you know. When I was in grad school, I took a survey class on Cybernetics. You ever read about that? Fuck man, it’s really fascinating stuff. It sounds to me like he might just… uh… wait, does he play music? I’d like to meet him. How many tours did he do in ‘Nam? ” 

When people respond this way, I believe that they believe I’m trying to rough in the outlines of the main character of the 1984 TV show Airwolf -- a cello playing former special operations commando with solidly blue collar origins -- well-travelled, fluent in several languages, possesses Jeopardy-level punning abilities, and an uncanny knack for solving international crimes, as well as New York Times crossword puzzles. For many people of a certain age, that show was a “runaway hit”. I am one of those people. Roger Willenbring is not. So no, he’s not Airwolf different. He’s Norrin Radd (aka: the Silver Surfer, herald of Galactus, possessor of the power cosmic) different. Momentarily consider him in THAT way -- in a thunderous Nietzschean sense applicable to sentient androids. My hope is that you will come to see what I see, but in order to get there, there are a number of preliminary waypoints we must traverse, stair step fashion.

2018 -- many people over the age of 35 of my current time are familiar with something called Facebook. It is what we call a “web application” - an internet destination where you can view short statements and pictures created by both friends and strangers, then register your satisfaction or dissatisfaction by clicking on a number of “buttons”. Content is presented in a format known as a “feed” - a term loaded with the imagery of hoofed livestock gathering around a trough. It may seem silly to you, but it is actually amazing. One thing that people of a certain age commonly do on Facebook is to periodically check their feed for epic celebrity takedowns and amusing cat-memes. Here’s how it works… you start swiping or scrolling down the feed, and visually scan for the words epic or kitty. When you reach the bottom, the application anticipates your anxiety, and requests more content from the server, and more cat memes and celebrity takedowns appear - along with more advertisements. This process is both user-driven and recursive, and can continue indefinitely (theoretically). This is known as infinite scrolling, and in my current time, encountering it is as ubiquitous as one simple trick to get rid of belly fat.  

July, 1981 -- during Ronald Reagan’s first term as president, I asked my father what I thought to be a simple question: “Why did you marry mom?” I remember the two of us sitting on the green couch in the living room. He was finishing off a cup of instant Taster’s Choice coffee, and I had just finished watching an episode of the Herculoids. I was eight years old.

I can’t be certain of how long he spoke for, but I remember afterwards the feeling of having been bodily transported. He started with an oblique reference to Dr. Shin, the pediatrician in Korea who introduced him to me, and made the introduction to my mom. 

Within a few minutes - and I do not remember how this happened - he had steered the conversation to a general overview of the Pleistocene epoch. My realization of it was gradual, like entering hypnosis, or figuring out that yes, you are in fact shrooming. But that’s part of the mystery of infinite scrolling. Roger Willenbring explained to me that back in the Pleistocene, the Aleutian Islands up by Alaska were actually connected by sea ice. On these islands lived a thriving group of burrowing rats, and at some point during the beginning of the paleolithic era, the ice thawed, and the sea ice receded, cutting off access between the islands. This had the effect of separating a once homogeneous rat population into several discrete breeding groups. Keep in mind, the rats were all members of the same species when the ice first started melting. For the next twelve thousand years, it was business as usual for the rats, just on separate islands: burrowing, foraging, hiding, having rat babies. Slowly but surely, the separate rat populations on the different islands started developing slightly different adaptations based on the unique conditions of their habitats. Some became nocturnal, others became long-toothed, some developed thicker fur, you get the idea. So one day, some human biologists showed up, noticed a whole bunch of apparently different rats, did a study, and found out that all the rats descended from a common ancestor a long long time ago during the Pleistocene. But, as a result of being isolated for twelve thousand or so years, and breeding separately, they had diverged into separate species of rats. My dad told me that the word to describe that slow sad process is called genetic drift, and that one of our highest aims as members of civilization is to ensure that this never ever happens to Homo Sapiens. Although he never said and that’s why I married your mom, but I understood the implication. So I thought.

That evening, my dad came in my room to tuck me in. He came specifically to tell me something that my mother didn’t want him to. He opened my bedroom door, then shut it behind him, leaving just a small crack to allow some of the hallway light to spill in. He sat on my bed and put his feet up, and said I want to tell you something as he wrapped his arm around me. I spooned his body so that my face rested on top of his belly. When he spoke, he took long breaks in between sentences and words. He asked me if I remembered anything about Korea. Not really, I said. Well, maybe a few things, but they were like blurry snapshots of memories I couldn’t really understand: playing in a sandbox, riding on a blue bicycle, and running in a street with other kids. He laughed. He asked me if I remembered Dr. Shin, my pediatrician. Again, no. 

“I want to tell you how I met you and your mother.”

He told me that he was not my biological father. That he adopted me shortly after marrying my mother in Korea, and that my sister Carmen was my half sister. I didn’t say a word. Just held on to him, and stared out into my room. For the first time in my life, I was having a conversation that I knew would shape the person I would later become. I was aware of the importance of it, but wasn’t quite sure what to do or say next.

“Your father was a man named –––––– –––––. I knew him. Not well, but I knew who he was. We were both in Korea at the same time. He is… Puerto Rican, I believe. A rather short, kind of loud man. Very bossy. Your mother says so any ways. When you were born, he had already left Korea.”

Right then, many things came into view for me that I hadn’t considered before - things that should have seemed obvious: my dark brown skin, my wide nose, the shape of my mouth, and the gaps in my teeth -- none of these features could possibly have come from my dad. For the next ten minutes, I asked all manner of questions that I thought were reasonable: is mom my real mom (yes), does Carmen know (no), do I have any brothers and sisters I don’t know about (yes, at least two), can I still call you dad (of course). 

“Does –––––– ––––– know I’m alive?”
“That, I don’t know. Your mother tried locating him when we got here to Fort Lee. She didn’t hear back from him.”
“Do you think he’s uh… that him and I are similar?”
“I can’t answer that buddy.” Suddenly, I could hear my mom calling -- Rog! Can you come here? Her words came across as upbeat, but her voice was low and congested, the way it sounds after she calls long distance to Korea, and asks about her younger brother. She had been crying. My dad kept talking, a bit faster. “I want you to know something. You don’t belong to anyone. Not me, or your mother, or –––––– –––––.” I could tell he wanted to say more, but he turned his neck toward the bedroom door, which had been pushed opened several inches wider. My mother stood there with her face in the crack.

My father got up and bent down to give me a hug, and as he did, I could feel my mother’s eyes on him the whole time. When he closed my door and left, I heard the hallway light switch get flipped, and the closing of my parents’ bedroom door. I laid as still as I could, and strained to make out any sounds coming from them. There was the occasional squeak of my mom’s wardrobe door opening and closing, followed by some loud whispering, then footsteps, and the creaking of their mattress. A few times, I thought I could make out actual words: why, child, father - but they were jumbled up in a mix of muffled sounds.

My thoughts drifted back to the Aleutian Island rats, to why my father thought it was a bad thing that their populations had genetically drifted. 


At a point in my childhood that predated my discovery of infinite scrolling, I learned that my dad was not from Virginia -- that in fact, he was born and raised in Minnesota. Most of my classmates’ families thought of Maryland as the north, so to them, Minnesota was basically at the doorstep of Canada, guaranteeing a permanent characterization of my dad as a yankee cracker descendant of snowshoe-wearing, canoe-riding fur trappers. Of course, at the time, I wasn’t savvy to all the layers of geographical and cultural nuance, but it made enough sense for me to realize a) my dad was from way up north, and b) that is why he talks the way he does. 

With increasing regularity, I began to observe him use words that weren’t used by any of the other grownups I had access to -- supraluminal was one of his steady favorites. At the dinner table, I remember him correcting my sister and me on small matters of subject-verb disagreements, and it occurred to me that similar conversations were probably not happening in the homes of any of my friends. The phrases and idiomatic expressions he’d use were not what you’d call colloquial. A typical roundup of his lexicon during a conversation about “how school went” might include items like in the grand scheme of things or... I suspect that in the vast cosmos or... it just boggles the imagination that or... I’m just glad that particular phase of my existence is over. And as a topper, he’d somehow find a way to sprinkle in a few lines of scripture from the King James bible. He spoke like that 100% of the time. Not a single person I knew or knew of spoke that way. Not any of my teachers or anybody at church, or people I saw on tv like newscasters, actors, or politicians. My dad spoke as if he were always on the cusp of a great word battle with Dr. Doom.

In between fourth and fifth grade school year in 1982, I was hanging out with Flynn and Chad during a varsity soccer game. On that particular night, the varsity team had played Gibbons, and won by one point. After all the players left, Flynn, Chad and I did our thing. We ran around the field, checking for any loose balls, and threw them back toward the center circle. When we were sure we got all of them, we collected the orange cones at the corners, walked back to the center, and bagged up the balls. We did this every game for coach Brooks, and in exchange, he’d let us have free Cokes and corn dogs during the games. It was maybe six o’clock in the evening, and we walked through a small cluster of pine trees on our way from the field to the gym. We enjoyed staying off the trail, because we were always eyeing good spots for building forts. Chad and Flynn dragged the two netted bags of balls along the ground, while I carried the orange cones. Most times, our conversations were about the latest rated R movies, but occasionally we’d discuss kids who had gotten into big trouble, and were sent to Dr. Boschen’s office. When we reached the PE building, we went through the boy’s locker room entrance, then into the gymnasium, and finally to the back towards the girl’s locker room. That’s where the equipment storage room was, and usually Mr. Brooks would be there waiting for us. That night, he wasn’t. So we just put all the stuff in the room, and shut the door. When we were done, we got our books from our lockers, then came back out to the gymnasium floor to wait for our parents to come pick us up. 

As soon as we sat down, Flynn pulled a small glittery ball out of his pocket, and said “Check this out y’all.” We barely had a second to examine the thing before he stood up, lifted his fist high up into the air, and slammed it down on the floor of the basketball court. The impact was almost noiseless, but tremendous. It sailed up to the rafters where it ricocheted off a blade of one of the giant ceiling-mounted fans. Then it fell down and bounced several times, and finally landed somewhere in the crevasses of the bleachers. Chad and I were stunned. Flynn scrambled over to the side of the bleachers to go down below and retrieve the ball, and disappeared for a couple minutes. When he returned, as casually as possible, I interrogated him about the ball. I was sure to space out my questions so as not to arouse his curiosity. Questions like: what was the ball made of, how much did it cost, where did he buy it, does it come in different sizes, and if he thought there were any more of them. He told me it was called a moon bouncer, and that he bought it from a gumball machine at Mason’s department store for ten cents. More than anything in life, I wanted to own a moon bouncer. Even though Flynn was my best friend, he wasn’t… worthy.

A week later, while playing outside in the backyard, I heard the screen door open then slam shut. I looked up from what I was doing. My sister appeared, looking a bit sleepy and annoyed. The outside air temperature was ninety degrees. I was sitting on the concrete slab in the back yard with a yellow beach bucket containing a rusty knife and a frog that I was preparing to dissect. 

“Daddy wants us to go with him to Mason’s to get spark plugs. He’s getting changed now.” 

She stood for a moment, not very interested in waiting for my response. After she was satisfied that she had delivered the message as intended, she turned around, opened the screen door, and disappeared back in the house. I fast walked past my sister toward my bedroom, and called out to my dad in the most innocuous voice I could muster.

“Dad, could I have a little bit of money to get something at Mason’s?” The key to getting my dad to do anything involving money was to be vague about its purpose, and to de-emphasize the money as much as possible with diminutive qualifiers like: a little bit of, just a nickel, or a couple cents. Those were my go-to words, but they were not producing results on that day.

“How many times do I have to tell you Benjamin?” came the reply. “A fool and his money are soon parted.” 

This was standard operating procedure for him, so I didn’t even break stride, just closed the door to my room, jumped across the bed, and opened the bottom drawer of my dresser where I kept my allowance money. For at least a year, I kept all my coins and bills in an old Vlasic pickle jar, hidden behind my socks and underwear. I had managed to squirrel away nearly eleven dollars. As I always did, I peeked over my shoulder toward the closed door to make sure no one was looking, then removed the jar. I always loved opening the lid of that jar because it let loose a metallic briny smell that made me salivate just a little. This made me laugh when I was in a good mood, because it reinforced a gleeful conviction that I was hungry for money. I grabbed a handful of coins and jammed them into the front pocket of my shorts. I didn’t even know exactly how much I had, I just wanted to have enough. Maybe I’d buy two or three. Then I screwed the lid back on the jar, and stuffed it back into the drawer. My dad and my sister were putting their shoes on by the front door. 

“We’re going to Mason’s right dad?”

“Yep. Thought I’d go get some spark plugs, and maybe some bits. Are you coming?”

“Yeah, I’m just putting my shoes on now.” He didn’t suspect a thing.
Mason’s
Mason’s was a department store, plus a hardware store. It had toys, garments, patio furniture, sporting goods, guns, and essential school supplies such as the trapper keeper and number two pencils. It was where my mom did the staple of our back to school shopping. My dad went in, and instantly turned left to where they kept all the lumber and tools. My sister and I went right, toward the toys and school supplies. Along the way to the toys, just on the other side of the cash registers, were half a dozen gumball machines lined up by the floor-to-ceiling plate glass. I used to stick my nose into the metal slots where the gumballs would come out of, and breath in deeply through my nose. I wanted to believe that I was the only kid in the whole world who ever came upon the idea to do that. I would frequently have thoughts and ideas that I envisioned to be astounding discoveries. In my imagination, when I would allow myself to really get carried away, I would sometimes think that if I just took the time to jot down some of those ideas; to parlay them into inventions or new ways of doing things, I could pave the way to one day becoming a millionaire. 

When you walked into the front entrance, there were the corrals of shopping carts. In those days, the carts were all metal, and heavy. Once in awhile, your finger might get pinched at the joint of two metal weavings, and it would hurt like crazy. 

Anyhow, let me get back to the specifics of this ball. I recall during this particular trip, noticing a wacky picture on the side of one of the gumball machines. The picture depicted a bright pink or green ball (I can’t remember which) bouncing from some point of origin within the continental United States, all the way up through the atmosphere, and reaching outer space, before finally resting in a crater on the surface of the moon. That picture in and of itself, was what sold me. Without a doubt, I was 100% convinced that the ball could not possibly travel to space. But I was also intrigued by the possibility that the ball, in the right hands, could bounce very very high. The name itself - moon bouncer - filled my head with the possibilities of perhaps setting a record, and becoming a local celebrity. I had recently watched an episode of Happy Days where Chachi attempted to get in the Guinness Book of Worlds Records by flipping quarters balanced along his elbow, and catching them as he explosively brought his hand forward before the quarters had a chance to fall to the ground. No doubt, this colored my perspective on the feasibility of bouncing the crap out of the moon bouncer. I was convinced that it was capable of reaching extraordinary heights… in the right hands. But it would take hard work and dedication. Well, I thought - I must somehow devise a plan to obtain this ball, and the cost would be ten cents. 

When my dad pulled up into a parking spot at Mason’s, I knew I had to act fast. I 
Baker 
I arrived early that morning. 

Step 4: Scrum of Scrums
February, 2017 -- I was laying down, fully supine on the downstairs couch, with an end pillow shielding my eyes from the sunlight pouring in from the parlor floor windows. My laptop, which had been chiming a dozen times a minute, was now closed and silent. Next to it was a photo album, also closed. For several minutes, I had been looking at my watch now and again. It said three pm when I decided to call my father. 

“Hey dad, it’s Ben.”
“Hello? Hello? Ben? Is that you?” As soon as he answered, I bolted up into a seated position.

“Yeah dad. Hey, can you hear me ok?”
“You're coming in loud and clear now. Not a moment ago.” After a brief pause, his tone turned cheerful. “I’m really glad you called because I’ve moved into the twenty first century.”

“Oh... how so?”

“Azpen... a748.” He says that as if it should ring a bell. “Never heard of it?”

“No, what's that?”

“A $37 tablet. That includes a three year warranty.”

“Oh wow, that's great. Did you get it recently?”

“Yes.” Then, in a lower voice.  “And I have all manner of viciousness to express to the author of the quick start guide. It’s really... I hope that you... I don’t want to describe it to you.”

“Ok.”

“Well, this morning, I started translating it into English. And it’s ALREADY written in English.” 

This makes me laugh. 

“Are you still there? The sound changed a little bit, and I thought maybe I lost you.”

“I'm here dad. I was just uh... laughing.” 

“Well, let me just say. I also got - at no cost at all - a forty inch flat screen television. If it got any bigger, it wouldn’t match the size of my apartment. So this is great. I plugged it in and connected it up to the antenna. I don’t know what you call it, but you stick it to the wall.”

“Yeah, an antenna.”

“Samsung, ultra high definition. Pretty nice actually. Ron de Florio approves.” 

I have no clue who Ron de Florio is, but brush it off to keep things moving forward. “How's everything otherwise?” I ask. “Are you still driving the old ladies around? What's going on with that woman Mary?”

“Oh boy. Mary Hartman. She’s terrible. I do believe her orbital frontal cortex has gone to heaven or hell, and that she’s operating without it. She's been driving her own car for many years. You know… people would plan their routes as to avoid her. She would go to McDonald’s every day at the same time. And go back to her apartment later that day. And that was an everyday thing. She’s going back and forth. About 12-14 miles an hour. Well, that all came to an abrupt end a couple of years ago. Then I started driving her around. Any way, and she wanted me to go that slow too. She’d just sit there in the passenger seat and scream at me -- God DAMMIT! WOULD YOU SLOW DOWN?! And I'd say to her Mary I’m going 15 miles an hour! 

“My reputation is being hurt in front of so many people just because I was hauling her around. And I just decided, no, it just isn’t worth it. I mean -- she antagonized people. Sales people. Even doctors! Money isn’t worth that much. So I just kissed her off as a bad apple.”

“Listen dad, I need to tell you something. This morning, I -- uh -- right after my meeting, while I was -- er, on my computer -- I found something that was really unusual.”

There’s a long silence and I feel my mind begin to unspool a complex and unnecessary staircase of twaddle as an introduction. I start over. “You know, this is very strange, but I’m pretty sure I may have located my biological father. It just… kind of happened this morning out of the blue.”

“I see.”

Step 5: Last Step
Willenbring walked along the fence with Schlarb until they came upon a small group of the men. They stood by a house

Jewitt sat at his barstool at the NCO club, back straight, elbows flared out, hands clasped around a ten ounce beer glass. Why the fuck do they make glasses two ounces shy of a bottle of beer? He looked right, then left, then down at his watch. A Bulova he picked up in Germany for twenty marks

“Get the fuck outta’ here!”
“Fuck you!” he said, stumbling out of the bar. 
He charged at Willenbring with a quick lunge off of his right foot, tucking his elbows in and bringing his hands up to his chest like a t-rex, fingers splayed out as though holding a crystal ball. Willenbring was mortified, and momentarily froze up. Jewitt’s right hand shot up and clutched at Willenbring’s collar, then swiped down. 

In January 1986, my parents had dinner at the fanciest restaurant in Wheeling, Illinois. My mom still recalls that evening as one of the single greatest unforced strategic blunders ever committed. Don Roth’s was the name of the place. It was a stupendous tacky spectacle located in a suburb to the northwest of Chicago, about twelve miles from O’hare airport, the type of place that cops and friends of cops bragged about going to. 

On the inside, there was a fanatical division of labor. For example, when you’d walk in, Jeanine the hostess would greet you. After some boilerplate chit chat, she’d introduce you to Janice, who would slow walk you down a dark carpeted corridor to the coat check area where the music of Dean Martin plays on permanent repeat. Along the walls, you’d notice waist-high oak wainscoting and black and white photos on the walls -- early twentieth century stock images of athletic patricians posing in front of boats, cars, dogs, and summer homes. You’d pass by an old black man, a real one, not a photo or a statue, wearing two thirds of a tuxedo, and carrying a stack of small towels into the men’s room. At the coat check, a young Polish woman with badly bleached blonde hair named Yolanda would take your coats, and hand you a ticket. Janice would then direct you to the right of coat check, where you’d pass through a velvet curtain and suddenly appear in the dining room. She would take you to table thirty six, and gently lay out the menus in front of you, but before leaving, she’d introduce you to Gary the sommelier, who always has such wonderful wine recommendations - please don’t hesitate to ask him for anything! Gary would present the hard-backed bifold wine list, opened up to page one, then briefly recite a pithy canned statement about the wonderful reds of Montepulciano. Gary would leave, and be followed by Hector, a short fair-skinned Mexican wearing a clip-on bow tie. Hector would be carrying a tray with a ramekin of butter, a small wicker basket filled with assorted breads, and a pair of short tongs, and ask, sourdough, white, or poppy? He would pronounce poppy like papi, and this would generally irritate one out of five of the white customers.

Table settings at Don Roth’s were exacting and standardized. Silverware and stemware was meticulously polished by the waitstaff, every single salt and pepper shaker was topped off, and every busboy was equipped with a gleaming pen-shaped crumber - a lightweight aluminum device used to efficiently sweep up small food debris from tables.

I have eaten at this restaurant with my mother on three separate occasions. The surface area of every single plate and bowl that arrived at the table was approximately 150% larger than required. All outbound food, prior to arriving at a dining room table, would be inspected by an expeditor at a station known as the slide. It was a long tiled countertop buffer that separated the dining room from the kitchen. The slide was the area in which the back of the house pushed their plates to the expeditor for final inspection before being carried to the front of the house. Plates moved from right to left, aligned with their accompanying tickets. The expeditor was responsible for synchronizing the tickets and plates, grouped by table number. All the way to his left was a small thermal printer that would continuously spit out new tickets. These would go into line all the way to the right. 

to the left stationed below exposed heat lamps in the forward facing kitchen. Dishes arrived at tables in staggered fashion, and were introduced as courses. But the thing that people could not stop talking about was the spinning salad bowl.

“Without argument, its signature offering was the spinning salad bowl, a flamboyant presentation with a bowl spinning on a bed of ice as a waiter or waitress proceeded to create it using 21 ingredients, including different varieties of lettuce and greens, bleu and cream cheese, chopped eggs, anchovies, salt and pepper, and a secret dressing. As one waiter once described it to a Tribune columnist: ‘We would spin the bowl and we would talk as we spun, and toss the greens and add the ingredients. No matter what was going on at the table — if the people were deep in discussion, if they were having drinks — everything would stop as we spun the bowl.’” 
(Chicago Tribune, May 15, 2017)

My mother especially was looking forward to the spectacle of the spinning salad bowl. The idea of a caucasian waiter, specially trained to assemble a twenty-one ingredient salad right at your table as envious diners gaped in disbelief, had her twisted up in knots. The location of Don Roth’s plopped into her lap by way of one of her Korean lady friends during a game of cards at our house. My mom organized weekly get togethers for about half a dozen Korean women - a consortium of sorts - which furnished the ladies a communications outlet apart from the nosy women of church. There was Mrs. Smith and Mrs. Wojcinski from the neighborhood - each had sons who attended high school with me, and each had husbands who were retired military. And there was Mrs. Kelner whose husband had recently retired. Occasionally, Haesim would stop by. She is my mom’s sister in law. Meetings of the KLC would follow a predictable agenda. My mom would shop for groceries a few days before the meet, and would prep many containers of turnips, sesame leaves, dandelion greens, and kimchi. The morning of, she’d have all four burners of the gas range going with pots and pans rotating on and off the range top. She’d sweat some onions in a twelve inch saute pan and set it off to the side, throw a salt-crusted piece of mackerel in a cast iron skillet with sesame oil until it smoked up. In the back, there would be a four quart stock pot boiling with little anchovies, garlic cloves, and scallions - for what purpose, I had no idea. A colander was always kept close by with long strands of mung bean noodles. And there was usually a deep skillet she kept for frying stuffed peppers and tofu steaks she had prepped the night before - filled with about an inch of vegetable oil, and kept at a medium flame. My mom could cook. The ladies would arrive around eleven am, head to the kitchen, and crack open some cans of beer. For the first hour or so, they’d be in the kitchen as my mom finished off whatever soup it was she was working on, then: bragging about their children; confirming or spreading juicy gossip; sharing makeup tips; reminiscing about Korea; complaining about their husbands.

The place had leather-bound menus, a wine list, and several types of glasses and forks already laid out on the tables. Toward the end of the meal, my mom didn’t finish her baked potato, and when the waiter came by to remove her plate, my dad stopped him, mumbled some words, then snatched the potato off the plate with his naked hand, and placed it into the inside pocket of his suit jacket. The waiter actually chuckled, and walked away shaking his head. I don’t know if he eventually ate the potato, but I can report that it was the last time my parents went out to dinner together. 

You don't know about this, but you should... This is going to be long -- again. Roger went to Vietnam and stayed there for many tours to save his brothers from being sent there. He was a very brave man in a very ugly situation. The only time I ever saw my father weep was the day Roger left for the military. It was a horrible day for all of us. We missed him so much! And then the war started. That was even worse.

If you recall the Tom Hanks movie where all of the brothers in a family were killed in WWII -- well, after that incident, the US made a law that if the father of a family had died, (as ours had in 1963) the US military could only allow one son in a war zone at a time. 

Your very brave father went to Vietnam and then kept requesting to stay for many tours in order to keep his brothers from having to go. He felt that he, a Petroleum Chemist rather than a field soldier, was less likely to be killed then they would be. 

When Roys decided to leave dental school (a program he was talked into and offered money to switch to, but ended up hating) requested to return to medical school, even though he had to wait to for the next term to resume, he, only then realized the mistake he'd made, as Roys was met on the way out of the building by Uncle Sam to inform him that he was now "their boy." 

At that point they denied Roger's concurrent request to stay in the war zone for the ?'th tour, because they knew they had Roys, a capable guy, who was most importantly, good at math, who they could immediately turn into a forward observer  -- a position least likely to survive, and in short supply. Roys went into the field of battle as the guy who would go ahead of his group and find "the enemy" in the jungles, and radio back calculations for the artillery to bomb them, and not him -- hopefully. Roys' calculations were always good. His three medals were from other very bad situations. His body is so riddled with shrapnel that an x-ray tech said his "inside" is one big scar.

Roger was a real hero to our family in that he, all on his own, stepped up to protect his brothers, even though he had plenty of near death situations himself. He’d be helicoptered into battle field camps to take oil samples to ascertain potential engine troubles on aircraft and what-not in the field. One morning, when he awoke early (his usual) and stepped out of his tent, he saw a huge unexploded bomb had landed in the middle of the tent ring. Roger very quietly went to every tent and told the guys in each to quietly escape as he proceeded to every tent before he left himself. Your dad not only saved his brothers from being sent to battle for as long as he could, but he also saved others with his quick and unselfish actions. A Vietnamese friend visited us and told us many stories after the fact. I recall his name but don't know how to spell it. 

Roys had a great deal of trauma with the three serious near death situations in Vietnam for which he was given medals, but I think the thing he was most damaged by was returning to the US and having war demonstrators spit on him and call him names for having served. These protesters may have never even considered that most of the returning troops went to war because they were drafted, and had no choice but to serve or go to prison. People forget the human cost of war. It isn't easy or "normal." It hurts everyone.

Roger probably did not say much if anything about Roys's experience, because he may feel as though he failed to protect Roys. Both of these men did what they had to, and every day since, they try to leave what happened in the past. People today call themselves a lot of noble things, but your dad and his brother were true patriots in a situation that should never be allowed to occur by civilized, moral, human beings. The repercussions of serving in a war zone never end for all involved. Armer served in the army reserves and Peter spent six years running the nuclear reactors on submarines and served through the last nuclear "full alert" on a submarine, since the Vietnam war. 

I am sure that your dad has shielded you from many things in your life that you have no idea of. He loves you very much! When he mentions you, his voice always changes in a very sweet way. He is very kind speaking of your mother too, although I am sure it is a painful subject. He has a huge heart. You should talk with him. 

I know you have a very busy life but he is getting old. You still have the chance. Take advantage of the time you have. He is a special person. I am sure you know that, but he needs you to protect him now as he goes into his late years. 

Okay, I'm out of phone battery and I'm exhausted, so it's off to bed now. Hope there aren't too many typos. 

Roger Allen Willenbring was born on 11 July, 1939 in Richmond, Minnesota, the oldest child of Cyril and Anne Willenbring. The first four years of his life was spent in the house of his paternal grandmother Lucia. Although she was born in Minnesota, she, like her late husband Herman, spoke with a heavy German accent - common among the older townspeople, all of whom  learned English from a community of non-native speakers. Lucia’s skin was flaky and dry, especially the areas around the middle knuckles of her fingers. Those knuckles were as big as walnuts, and were her weapon of choice in her capacity as a sunday school teacher at Saints Peter and Paul Church. If any of the children misbehaved, Lucia would raise her hand up and snap her wrist down so fast, it felt like she was slamming croquet mallets down on your head. Little Roger was just a year and a half old when he first became acquainted with walnut hands. It wasn’t his fault of course. You’d ask the boy a question, and he’d answer jah or nein - just like any of the other children in town. How was he to know that German was never to be spoken? 

Though my dad’s birth certificate lists his father’s occupation as carpenter, Cyril Alois Willenbring earned a living as a tool and die maker. He was an outdoorsy man with a slight build, good with his hands, and known for his punctuality. He was always photographed in clothes that were a size too big for him. He enlisted with the Navy in 1943, and more than anything, wanted to be a pilot. They made him a tail gunner instead. Cyril was small - about five foot seven, a hundred and forty pounds - and as it turns out, just the right size for climbing down into the small cramped space in the back end of a three-man torpedo bomber aircraft called an Avenger. So in 1944, Cyril was assigned to the USS Kitkun Bay as a tailgunner. He lasted six months, and never flew a single mission. In early 1945, he received an early medical discharge on account of a mental breakdown, and returned to Richmond by bus from St Cloud. He was an irritable son of a bitch who smoked constantly, and spent his evenings alone. People around him, especially the family, were careful to never bring up his navy service. He found a job working for Joe Hillger’s company making repair parts for floor sanders, and quickly became Hillger’s number one man. This brightened things up a bit, and took the rough edge off him. He established himself as a reliable machinist, but also as an exceptional craftsman with a natural eye for precision. While working full time for Hillger, he saved his money to purchase three quarters of an acre of land on a hill facing the Minnesota river in St Cloud. In the spring of 1946, Cyril began work on a split-level wood and brick house with help from his brother Paul. To my father’s continued amazement, the two men built a four bedroom house - an obscenely large home in those days - entirely by themselves within six months, all while keeping full time jobs. To be fair, my dad and his two brothers helped out, but mostly with the unskilled work - digging the foundation, mixing cement, framing walls, hammering nails, and painting. 

In October 1946, Cyril decided to move the family in. They all agreed, the house was the finest thing he had ever made. Before Thanksgiving, word had spread that Cyril Willenbring had built the nicest house in all of Stearns county. He swelled with pride, and for a time, was pleasant to be around. The family spent their first winter happily tolerating the small things that went wrong - temperamental light fixtures, a leaky faucet, a drafty room. Cyril devoted all of his spare time in the evenings and weekends working down a punch list of items, always putting the last few touches on something or other. The next spring, he even agreed to help move a baby grand piano into the family room so that his wife Anne could practice singing with her church choir right from the house. But by may of the next year, there were no more tasks to complete. And that is when Cyril began returning home later and later in the evenings. My dad says of his father, He didn’t come straight home from work, but when he was there, I always knew it. You could just tell. Everyone, especially my brothers, would be extra quiet. I tried to avoid him as much as possible because he was just mean as hell when he started in on the liquor. I believe it was the war that ruined him. I guess the old man didn’t live up to the image he had of himself. 

By the year 1947, my dad and his three younger brothers Armer, Roys, and Peter were taking turns getting beaten by Cyril on a near daily basis. The reasons: being too loud, not doing a chore you were supposed to, or just being in the house at the wrong goddamn time. Cyril’s face was always red, and if you looked up close, you could see hundreds of tiny burst capillaries around his nose. On the days when he was just barely holding on -- just teetering on the edge of being drunk, he’d call one of the boys into the parlor and ask a question. What’s going on with that book report? Why is your mother so upset? When was the last time you checked on your sister? My dad would usually be the one to volunteer to go downstairs for these chats, knowing full well it would be a maximum of ten minutes before the old man would be taking off his belt and whipping the crap out of him. He accepted it as an immutable law. From the top of the staircase, he would hear Cyril uncap the bottle of whiskey, pour some into a tumbler, take a drink, and light a cigarette. Then the soft groaning of upholstery as he sank down into his favorite chair by the fireplace. What it really boiled down to for the old man was simple: if you set into motion any series of events that could conceivably be linked to a current state of events resulting in a state of agitation for Cyril, you’d be called downstairs to the parlor to answer a few questions.

When my dad reached high school, Cyril was a crumpled up papier mache version of a man. His appetite had nearly vanished, and he was always red faced and bloated. He was weak, and required longer to get into and out of his chair. One good thing about it was that the fireside beatings were nowhere near as bad as they once were. My dad would stand in front of the old man in the parlor, and watch him fiddle with his belt and smoke his cigarette and refill his glass. He would answer Cyril’s questions without stuttering. He would take the beating, and go upstairs, and fall asleep. He came to pity his father. 

In 1959 when my dad left the family house to head out for basic training, it was the only time any of the kids saw Cyril cry. It was the last time the two of them would see each other. Old Cyril wound up dying four years later from a ruptured aorta - what my aunt Georgianna describes as literally, a broken heart.

“Most people feel they understand the world with far greater detail, coherence, and depth than they really do. We therefore propose that knowledge of complex causal relations is particularly susceptible to illusions of understanding.” Rozenblit and Keil, An illusion of explanatory depth, Cognitive Science 2001.

Unlike many people I’ve met, my dad isn’t afraid to say the words I don’t know. As a kid, I asked him all sorts of panel-stumping questions that I thought he’d have the answers to -- things like why is gold valuable? … how do we know the sun is going to explode one day? … why can’t we just make as much electricity as we want from lightning?  … why can’t we get rid of garbage by sending it to the sun in a big rocket ship? The words I don’t know flew out of him with ease. It just didn’t bother him at all.  But the thing I really admire about him was that he figured out a way to tell a story right on the heels of I don’t know. To the people of the future -- this is an important trait.

Nowadays, he drives a five year old baby blue Toyota Prius that smells like a greasy hammer. On any given day, the hatchback is filled with items such as: an electric air pump, sockets, a reciprocating saw, a giant wooden spool, several feet of coaxial cable, a five gallon gas container with the letters JP-4 stenciled on the side, a wire brush rifle cleaning kit, and several small metal soup cans with the paper labels peeled off, each filled with an assortment of screws, nuts, washers, and anchors. Over the last decade, he’s thinned out about fifteen pounds, mostly because of the change in his diet, and a renewed dedication to getting regular exercise. He enjoys walking the long loop of the Heinz national wildlife refuge that is twenty minutes from his apartment. Spring and fall are his favorite seasons to go walking. When the weather isn’t too humid, he can do the full loop in a little under an hour. 

For quite a few years now I’ve meant to write something recounting my association with Dr. Shin. It is clear to me that this person was the smartest, most conscientious person I have ever known. As a witness to a part of his life, I feel a need to put what I know into writing.  

In October 1973, I’d met a Korean lady. She had an eleven-month-old son and the three of us were at the start of what would become a lifelong relationship. The little boy had a breathing problem while sleeping that, to me, seemed life threatening. As he slept, I stayed awake fully expecting to have to start oral resuscitation at any moment; his breathing sounded that bad. Morning came without the need for anything heroic but follow through was needed. I talked with our local Army medic. I’d wanted to see if an Army doctor would be willing to help. The thought I walked away with was that it probably wasn’t a good idea at this point in time. I’d suspected that but hoped there might be an exception. His meaning was loud, clear, and fortunate. 

Somehow, the little boy’s Mom had known all along how things would turn out and shortly the three of us were on our way to Pohang, South Korea. There we would seek help from Dr. Shin Dae Shik, MD. In Korean, the family name comes first. Contrary to that convention, in English Dr. Shin liked to arrange his name, “Dae Shik Shin”. Dr. Shin seemed about 60 years old, heavy jowled, yet clear-eyed and instantly likable. He gave a quick but comprehensive exam and two injections. I expressed concern about the boy’s recovery. Unabashedly Dr. Shin answered, “To be completely cured in one day--- due to my skill and kindly attention!” He grinned childishly. That seemed pretty doubtful to me as my billfold came out. Dr. Shin said, “Your money is the wrong color. Instead, come back alone sometime. I need to practice my English.” The cost, had I paid it, would have been about two dollars. By lucky happenstance, I didn’t know. That evening the boy slept in perfect health and the cure was permanent!

A few days later I returned to Dr. Shin’s office as agreed. He was clearly pleased at my coming and had me sit next to his desk, chatting as his work permitted. He worked all day, every day without appointments. It became clear that this was a brilliant human being, the complete opposite of those that worked around me. He was the opposite of me as well. To the extent possible, that would change. A conversation with Dr. Shin was like a breath of fresh air. His personality had to rub off. 

It became clear that if we were to continue meeting, and that offer was made, I needed to learn, on my own, some rudimentary medicine. More than once in our first conversation, I wasn’t following. This was the chance of a lifetime and somehow, I had to find a way to connect the dots. Not surprisingly, the Army was unwilling to allow me to borrow medical texts. As luck would have it though, they would let me take a correspondence course in a variety of medical subjects. I picked a 98-hour course in medical laboratory technology. Finished it in a hurry and it did what was needed. I also took a basic medic’s course thinking more would be better. It was not. 

Dr. Shin recalled that when he was age five or so his father took him to a doctor. Shin took along his toy pistol. At the doctors’ he got the usual two shots in the butt. His dignity was upset so he pulled out his toy pistol and fired on the doctor. With grand dramatics, the doctor pretended to be shot. Overjoyed, he fired again with the same reaction. The experience had turned into fun. His Father spoke angrily, “I spent good money for your medical care. What did you do? Shoot the doctor!” The experience changed Shin for life. From that day on he could only see himself becoming a doctor of medicine. Selecting pediatrics doubtless came from the same experience. 

His medical training was under Japanese military occupation control. All the professors were German educated Japanese. They taught in the Japanese language but from time to time they even taught in German. This gave Shin a big advantage. He already spoke Japanese and English. German was just another language to master and he had a gift for languages. Unfortunately, English did not enjoy any tolerance. For practice, Shin had kept a diary in English. It was confiscated. Fortunately, nothing came of it but others doing the same thing had disappeared and were presumably killed. It’s interesting to note that despite this and other negative experiences with Japanese, in his medical practice Dr. Shin often treated Japanese patients and was open and cordial with them. 

The Korean War left Dr. Shin with mental scars peculiar to especially kind, thoughtful persons. Specific experiences should go unmentioned. I think war, mans’ least noble effort, should not be associated with Dr. Shin. 

Having learned from Dr. Shin the techniques to identify the metacercariae of Opisthorchis sinensis, I decided to try my hand at it. Where I worked, there was a lab at my disposal. It was not a medical lab, but it had a good microscope and fume hood. The Korean lady previously mentioned, by this time, was my wife and she was curious as to what foolishness her husband was up to. It was necessary for me to go fishing in a river containing the organism before the dissection and microscopy could be attempted. I’d simply told her that I was going fishing since there wasn’t much reward in a detailed explanation. The fish I caught were small, like two inches long. They were adequate for my purpose. On my return, my wife demanded to see the fish. Meekly, I displayed my catch. We agreed that it was a good thing this was not my main means of livelihood. It was fun to convert gab to substantive observations, and the little metacercariae obliged by doing their little pushups under the microscope just as Dr. Shin had described. This would never lead to anything I could later use, but it did make me a better conversationalist. There was one practical development from all this.

The little boys’ mother, previously mentioned, reported to me with more than a little disgust that her son had passed an adult helminth. Instantly, the quack practitioner that lay dormant inside me emerged. I got fecal specimens and dashed off to my lab. There, slide mounts of the ova were made and identified as Trichuris trichiura; with all the “skill and kindly attention” I could muster under the circumstances. Off on my bicycle I went to Dr. Shin’s office. He didn’t like my microscopic mounts and insisted on remaking them. They had to be thicker with nice, football shaped ova all over the slide. Unlike me, he knew there might be other things to find. It was also a good thing because it deflated my ego to where my head wouldn’t burst. Dr. Shin measured off the medication into little paper packets neatly folded and deposited in a special envelope. It was like a visit to an apothecary shop in a bygone era. He warned me the medication was nasty tasting and how to mix it with sugar. That didn’t really prepare me for the conflict I had with a child just barely two years old. His Mom wasn’t sure which side to join. He fought the “skill and kindly attention” right out of me I’m ashamed to say, but in the end, his unwanted guests were dead. It’s a good thing too because he’s now much bigger than I. Recently, we talked about our conflict and he apologized. 

In 1975 my daughter was born. She had a bilateral cleft lip and palate. In front of my wife and daughter, I tried to put on a caring appearance. When alone, I experienced a minor reaction. My skin was numb and there was tunnel vision (not bad, just annoying). It was necessary for me to return home alone by bus, about 60 miles away. Many times, my wife had warned me not to take any bus with big, knobby tires because that was a country route bus. The bus I took went over bumps so big they caused me to bang my head repeatedly on the overhead rack. Strangely, it didn’t seem to bother me but the other passengers gestured for me to hang on to my seat, so I did. The bus came to a stream and the driver opened the door letting water into the passenger compartment. This must have been so he could ford the stream without allowing the bus to float. I’d wondered why the others were either barefoot or wearing high, rubber boots. This was old stuff to them! In my numb, half blind state, I’d gotten on a country route bus, the very thing my wife said not to do. At destination, the numbness and tunnel vision were almost gone. Getting bopped on the head and the splashing water must have cured it. I went to Dr. Shin’s office, although wet from the knees down. We talked and he put my daughter’s situation in perspective. After my wife and daughter were home, Dr. Shin examined her. “Very good health!” he said, completely ignoring the obvious. It was much later that I realized he was treating my wife and me. He gave us the moral strength to behave like real adults. I’m told that many others, especially fathers in the same situation fail badly. How could I ever thank him?

On three separate occasions Dr. Shin made me a gift of Chinese calligraphy art. The actual artworks are about a foot wide, about four feet long and they roll up like a scroll, on a flat cloth backing. One day he took me to a store front office. He called it a calligraphy practice room and, surprisingly, he was the proprietor. The practice room was a place where people could come and practice the art. It takes about 20 years to be a passable calligrapher. Dr. Shin was, at that time, South Korea’s foremost calligrapher, and I am the proud owner of three of his works. Can’t read them and sure wish someone would at least tell me what they say, but they are beautiful. Dr. Shin explained that there were four criteria on which Chinese calligraphy is judged. They are beauty, strength, sensible direction, and character. He gave me an understanding of what those mean but I’d best avoid trying to restate it. 

In 1985, my wife went back to Korea for a visit. Dr. Shin was gone. She was told that he had died. In the years I’d known Dr. Shin, he never once said anyone had died. Instead he would say, “If alive today, XXX would be XXX years old.” If alive today, Dr. Shin would be 100+ years old. I miss him a lot, but I have the calligraphy he gave me. 

By the fourth grade, I noticed that my own language, and that of my sister was sharply diverging from that of the children in our neighborhood. My sister would pepper her sentences with words like perhaps and indubitably. One day, when I was getting a haircut at the mall, I was talking about the assassination of John F. Kennedy to the lady who was cutting my hair. I don’t really remember why, or how it came up, but when my mom came to pick me up, I noticed how the lady gushed about what a good boy I was, and oh how smart! I took note of her reaction, because who wouldn’t like being called smart, right? Later on, I asked my mom why the lady would say that. My mom explained to me that I went to a good school that was five years ahead of the public schools. FIVE FUCKING YEARS! Could it be true? With my mom, you must always always insist on verification. At the time, she just said this: You school is berry berry exscrewsive. Later on, she explained to me how she had come to that conclusion. Not long after my sister and I started attending Bollingbrook, my mom went to a second hand book fair at the school gymnasium. They would hold them every summer in between school sessions to give the parents an opportunity to buy books from the parents of older kids at a discounted price. My mom went with Esther White, and while they were there, Esther browsed through the stacks, which were organized by grade, then by subject. Later on, she explained to my mom that some of Bollingbrook’s fourth grade textbooks were being used in high school classes at Peabody. I fact-checked this claim with Mrs. White many years later, and it turns out that my mom was not making that shit up. I asked my dad what school was like for him when he was a kid. He told me with a long frown, that he was forced to go to Catholic school, where he had to learn Latin, and memorize humongous passages of the bible by old shrewy nuns. I would never, in a million years Benjamin, subject you or your sister to such horrors. 

Zoran the Albanian busboy. I walked into work on Monday a little early. Actually, I was an hour early, but wanted to go through a few dry runs with the new computer system Anna had installed last week. I came in through the side entrance as always, and saw Sabrina seated at table seven with her back to two people sitting behind her at table five. A silver haired Italian man wearing a shiny teal suit, hunched over and speaking in a low voice to a much younger blonde wearing a flower print dress. The woman’s half finished plate of tortellini was pushed off to her right, and the ashtray was beginning to fill up. I looked over at Sabrina who was tasting a glass of Pinot Grigio between two fingers and staring at the silverware tray on top of the bus station.

“Hey Ben.” she said, barely moving her lips. Then she took a gulp of wine and headed over to table five. I watched her walk over to the couple at table five, wine glass still in her hand. Just before reaching them, she became aware of the pinot grigio she still held cupped in her right palm, and sharply turn to the right to set the glass on top of the bar as discreetly as possible. Then she walked back to her table.

“You guys want anything else?” The guy must’ve mumbled a no because Sabrina just nodded, and set a check presenter on the table in front of the guy. I was sitting now at table seven with my legs crossed, trying to decide who I should stare at: the Italian low talker or Sabrina, who had just taken a seat up at the bar where her wine was. I decided to begin writing a dialogue in French on the white butcher paper in front of me. The king of France was having a discussion with Voltaire, who was attempting to explain to the king how to divide a pizza into three equal pieces. I forgot all about the new computer system.

An hour later, after the last table had left, and Sabrina was doing her server report from lunch, Anna came walking in. “Hey Anna.” I said. “Hi Ben.” I made sure to smile at her when I said hello. It was the most obvious technique of discovering what mood she was in. The coast looked clear, but I would have to run some further tests. I turned to Sabrina, who was busy counting money.

“How many reservations do we have tonight?”
“None.” she replied in a light airy voice, then grinned with her lips pressed tightly together.
“Excellent.” I said, as if things were going just as I had planned. “And… am I alone?”
“Zoran’s upstairs cleaning from the party that was here, but he’ll be down to help as soon as he’s done.”
“Perfect.” I said. That would mean that Anna would bartend. Of course what that really meant was that Anna would get shit faced drunk on red wine -- she’s usually on her seventh glass of wine by 8:00 -- then decide at 8:30, now would be a great time to finally figure out how to program all of the satellite TV channels using the mysterious green buttons on the remote control. 

The place was absolutely dead, and I was doodling stick figures on the same piece of butcher paper when I noticed Anna walk past me to reach for the red magic marker. It must be “specials” time. I continued with my stick figure drawing, and struggled to smile. Then I let out a sigh and looked over my shoulder at Anna who was leaning against the wax board. She uncapped the red marker with a look of seriousness, and called Jaime the cook over to stand by her side. At this point, I’ve got my stick figure man in a three frame cartoon where he’s accelerating.

“Jaime, c’mere.” she says. “Arright.” She is all business, no fucking around. Like a platoon sergeant, giving a pep talk to the men, telling them all how they’re gonna’ take out that goddamn machine gun nest that’s been choppin’ up our boys from the fith regiment like they wuz ham-boyga meat!

“We’re gonna’ do…” I aim my eyes downward, and grip my pencil. “Fettucine.” Then, abruptly… “No, no, no. Penne.” She’s a stone cold killer. “With chicken, tomatoes, artichokes.” Then she snaps to Jaime. “You got artichokes tonight right?” Jaime nods yes with his arms still folded. He is glued to the same spot in the same position.

“And…” 

My fourth grade teacher’s name was Kay Bailey. She had recently moved to Virginia from Birmingham, Alabama. Mrs. Bailey was a lean muscular woman in her thirties, built like a field hockey player. She had naturally blonde hair she liked to keep feathered, in Farah Fawcett style. 

She walked fast, talked fast, and loved to cuss. Her southern drawl was much deeper than most of the other teachers, and she didn’t hesitate to crack off phrases right in the middle of class that I had only ever before associated with Yosemite Sam in cartoons. Mrs. Bailey would literally interrupt a kid who was reading a passage aloud in class, just to say something like: Are you outta’ your cotton pickin’ mind? Do not test me boy! Your mouth is writin’ checks your butt can’t cash! Cover yourself up sugar, you’re almost as nekkid as a jaybird! Mrs. Bailey was no fool, and she quickly picked up on the fact that there was a tight-knit group of class clowns: me and my two best friends Flynn and Chad. If we were goofing off in class, and she just wanted to fire a warning shot, she might say No comments from the peanut gallery. You know who I’m talkin’ to. When all three of us were busted, she’d say well lookee here, if it ain’t the Footcher trio. If it were just two of us, it was My my! Looks like the Bouveler twins are up to somethin’.

He’s got a sense of humor that’s difficult to follow, and can sometimes offend people. He finds both conventional and unusual things funny. Occasionally, he’ll laugh hysterically, and when he does, it comes at you all at once like unexpected machine gun fire. The force of it actually causes his head to recoil, as if he were spraying bullets right out of his mouth at you. The first time you hear it, it scares you a little, and makes you think HOLY FUCKING SHIT!

When I was in high school, I asked him about the “summer of love” (aka: 1969) and whether he remembers what he was doing. He had no idea what I was talking about. It dawned on me later, that for him, the notion of the sixties being consequential in a “cultural” way (with heavy emphasis on actual air quotes), is completely outlandish. And then it would occur to me that he never talks about politics. Ever. I don’t even remember him offering any opinions on any political issues. 

He never encouraged my sister or me to go to church, but when I was twenty nine years old, I found out that he regularly prays for our salvation. Also, that he carries a small copy of the King James bible, and reads it every day. On September 12, 2001, I called him up. During our phone conversation, I found out that he has always been Christian. Up until that phone conversation, I wasn’t sure what he believed in. Many years later, he calmly told me that he once had an enjoyable one hour conversation with a ghost in a cave somewhere in Turkey. 

I met Neil Grossman for the first time when I enrolled in a graduate level seminar on Spinoza’s ethics. He wore wire framed glasses, had narrow shoulders, and stood with very good posture despite having a slight paunch. He was bald at the top, with tufts of silverish grey hair that sometimes flew out like clumps of dried grass, but usually . When he lectured, he usually held a cup of coffee. 

Every pair of pants  I ever saw him wear was made of either cotton, wool, corduroy, or some hybrid of those three materials. He owned many v-neck sweaters, with and without sleeves.

He struck me as a well-educated hippy, nostalgic for the sixties - who happened to be the owner of a master’s degree in Astrophysics from MIT, thereby guaranteeing his vice-like clamp on tenure in the department of philosophy at the University of Illinois at Chicago. He taught a few graduate seminars on the philosophy of mind, near death experience, and ethics.

His entree into the world of Spinoza and Descartes was a no-brainer. Most of the older professors viewed him as as harmless kook, a little too obsessed with near-death experiences, and Spinozistic mysticism. In 1997, he invited me to his apartment in the Ravenswood neighborhood on the far north side of Chicago. A year earlier, I was his teaching assistant in a survey class, aimed at steering first and second year students into considering a philosophy major. 

“I’m having a little get together, and thought maybe you might be interested in some of the people who will be there.”

I parked my car somewhere on Argyle street, two blocks from the address I was given. I brought a bottle of red wine from the restaurant I worked at. When I arrived, I was clearly the youngest guest - by at least two decades. I was on high alert for any weird behaviors that might indicate any cultish affiliations or tendency to get naked as a group. Before entering, I pledged to uphold a few promises. 

First, I would not drink too much. I already knew that alcohol was a weakness. The last thing I needed was to be roped into a weird sexual romp with a pair of baggy skinned professors of theology. 

Second, I would resist the urge to talk. I was pretty confident that I was a smart guy, but in a group of older people, many of whom were full professors, shooting off at the mouth would just come off as stupid.

Last, I would try my best to not cross the line with Neil. I wanted to be able to count on a letter of recommendation from him in a year when I would be applying to graduate school. Although our relationship was extremely cozy, I didn’t want to muddy the waters to give the impression that I wanted to be his philosophical sidekick.

A few years later, I started reading the comic books of Jack Kirby. He was a marvelous man who spun tales of giant sized heroes and monsters propped up on stilts of phony physics and folkloric archetypes. In his hands, the phrase immutable law took on the characteristics of a special kind of dog whistle - a rock solid guarantee that an avalanche of self-serious and awesome sounding baloney was just around the corner. He dropped the phrase constantly - in the soliloquies of villains and the cool-headed musings of scientifically pedigreed male hero types. To wit: “Galactus, an immutable force as old as time… possesses an incalculable knowledge and strength.” 

During this time, my relationship with my dad went through an extended cooling off period.  I experienced wImmutable forces and laws, being the provenance of beings of immense power, permit origin stories to be told. So let me propose the following as a point of departure…

There were three colored boys around the corner:  brothers between the ages of six and ten. Those boys never listened to their parents, and were always out on their bikes. They taught me how to do a wheelie, and showed me how to fasten a playing card to the spoke of my wheel with a clothespin to make a clicker. And there were the Palmerries -- a mixed Filipino family with something like seven children. All the boys looked like brown skinned replicas of Elvis Presley dolls, with hair that always looked slightly wet, and perfectly parted on the side. The oldest boy’s name was Michael, and there were days I actually prayed that he would move in with me and become my older brother. Simone and Man lived next door. Their parents were colored also. Their father was a retired Sergeant Major in the Army who bragged about owning a cadillac. 

Just like Chad, Flynn had an older brother too - Tad. He was the best artist in school. He was also an amazing soccer player, and was probably going to get a scholarship to UVA or North Carolina. That’s what Mrs. Pollard at the cafeteria would say - Tad’s gonna be a Tar Heel. Sometimes, when I’d go to the art studio with the lower school students, I’d see some of his work on display. There were two things about his sketching I thought stood out, that nobody came close to matching - his skill at shading, and his impeccable realism when it came to small details like knuckles and eyes. 

I watched Blade Runner at the Walnut Mall Theater with my dad. It was just before my tenth birthday and I remember this was a big deal to me at the time, because it was a rated R movie. There were maybe ten other people in the theater with us, and they showed a trailer for the movie Tron, right before the movie started. When the movie let out, it was twilight, and the air was much cooler, maybe not even eighty degrees. My dad and I drove back home without saying a word. I stuck my hand out of the car window to feel the breeze, and looked up at the sky from time to time. It was a short ride home, less than one and a half miles. And quiet. Especially once you got to Holly Hill Drive. When you passed by the pinball arcade, and started up the hill, the only sound was be the rustling of maple leaves, chirping crickets, and an occasional lawn mower. 

Every nickel he made, he gave to his mother Anne. She was abandoned by her parents at the age of nine, and became a maid for a Swedish family up until she turned eighteen, at which point she went to something called teacher’s college - despite only having a formal education that ended at the fourth grade. Anne had a high opinion of her singing voice, and enjoyed gossiping about the ladies in her church choir. 

When I returned home from the army in 1993, I found one of his old class A uniforms, and on it was a purple heart. Another thing I had never known about him. That year, I enrolled in a classical studies seminar. I remember one day early on in the semester, the professor recounted the story of Cincinnatus the Roman, and that was the moment I began to see the thing that makes my dad different.

So Cincinnatus left his plow standing where it was, and hurried to the city. When he passed through the streets, and gave orders as to what should be done, some of the people were afraid, for they knew that he had all power in Rome to do what he pleased. But he armed the guards and the boys, and went out at their head to fight the fierce mountain men, and free the Roman army from the trap into which it had fallen. A few days afterward there was great joy in Rome. There was good news from Cincinnatus. The men of the mountains had been beaten with great loss. They had been driven back into their own place. And now the Roman army, with the boys and the guards, was coming home with banners flying and shouts of victory; and at their head rode Cincinnatus. He had saved Rome. Cincinnatus might then have made himself king; for his word was law, and no man dared lift a finger against him. But, before the people could thank him enough for what he had done, he gave back the power to the white-haired Roman Fathers, and went again to his little farm and his plow. He had been the ruler of Rome for sixteen days.

But one day in 1940, she went with Cyril and Anne to the Benton county fair, just as they always did for the past three years. It was hot and muggy, and they had brought a picnic blanket to sit on. They found a patch of clovers below a tree, not too far from the beer garden. Cyril picked the spot right after he spotted Carl and Sofia Bruemmer. Lucia would have a good time chatting with Sofia, while Cyril and Carl could talk their wives into excusing them to go to the beer garden. So the men left, as they did for the past several years, to head over to the beer garden tent. While Cyril and Carl enjoyed their third beer, three young men - Acadians from upper town St Cloud, and heard Lucia and Frau Bruemmer speaking in German. 

She began staying at home, and only spoke German in Richmond with close friends at church. When she spent time with her grandson Roger, she took every opportunity to remind him that German was a forbidden language - Nur Englisch! By the time US paratroopers were landing in Normandy, Lucia’s frequent admonitions were followed by a mild concussion.

In 1989, I was a freshman at the University of Iowa. Over winter break, I went to see my dad in the hospital because he had suffered a heart attack, and just had triple bypass surgery. He was laid up with pneumonia, with lots of tubes going into and out of him. He was on morphine and antibiotics, but experiencing a lot of pain from having his breastplate broken two days earlier as prep for the operation. The doctor explained that the pneumonia was a pretty common complication after bypass surgery, but to…He spoke slowly, in a raspy voice, and had to stop every few words to take a few shallow breaths. He asked my sister and my mother to leave the room, then asked me to check for his apartment keys in his jacket pocket. They’re still there I told him. At first, I thought he was disoriented from the pain medication. A minute later, he described the location of a drawer in his apartment where he kept a film canister. In it were a dozen or so cyanide pills. I was standing above him, holding his hand. Because of the tubes, he couldn’t rotate his head, but his eyes were aimed right at me. He asked me to go get the canister for him, and not to tell anybody. Dad, why do you even have cyanide? Turns out, he’s always kept some handy, just in case something like this were to happen. The pneumonia was more frightening to him than the pain, because it meant he could lose his ability to take in enough oxygen to keep his brain going. Promise me, he said. I told him if it things didn’t get better, I’d go get the canister. 

Most of the white neighbors who knew my dad, and were friendly with us, referred to him as a yankee. Mr. and Mrs. White never called him that. On the other side of us, there was a black family with two kids, a sister and brother: Simone and Man. Man was two years older than me, and one day called my dad a goddamn pussy ass cracker. I didn’t know what he meant, but I knew it was bad. I immediately went home with my toys, and as I walked away, heard his voice shouting out to me - goddamn yankee cracker! Our friendship came to an end after that. He was from way way up north, which must have been why he spoke so differently than all the people in town. I ran with that explanation for a little while, but by the time I reached the fourth grade, I began to meet other people from Minnesota - like my teacher Ms. Stone - who didn’t sound at all like my dad. And then there was my uncle Roys who grew up with him. He didn’t sound anything like my dad either. 

Most of the soldiers walked from place to place, but the MP’s rode around in jeeps. They had black armbands, carried sidearms, and wore helmets instead of soft caps. Then there were the infantry troops. They didn’t seem to ever just walk. From my perspective, they weren’t allowed to just walk from point A to point B - it wasn’t deadly enough. They would low-crawl or march, or double-time. Over short distances, they would run along a wood beam, or swing across a ditch using a manila rope, or some other crazy thing. Even when there were just two of them together, they’d inevitably fall into a left-right cadence that became synchronized, their arms and legs swinging in clock-like fashion. I’d watch them do their PT in the mornings. They would warm up by doing several minutes of jumping jacks, situps, pullups and pushups. But the thing I thought was the absolute best was how they’d run together in tight formation. Because I was so far away, their pace was slow and gradual. I would see them from my window, far beyond the barbed wire fence that circled the post. They would move along the packed dirt roads, like a huge rectangular slug, crisscrossing the post while singing army cadences. I didn’t understand any of the words, but I’d hum along as best I could. And the sound of a hundred and twenty feet stomping in unison was mesmerizing. 

There was also a counter that had ten or so circular barstools bolted into the ground. In 1975, I discovered these stools had a feature I like to call “near-infinite-swivel”. Whatever mechanism attached the seat to the body was threaded in such a way that made it damn near impossible to reach the stool’s maximum wind up tension. The linoleum floors were dark grey with a speckled pattern. When I was about three years old, my dad would take me there on weekends, and let me draw a glass of root beer or coca cola from the fountain machine.It was a smell I looked forward to each time I went. That, and the hope that my dad would let me reach into the icebox and use the metal scoop to fill my own glass.

I was three years old at the time, and learning English at a rapid clip. He kept a small spiral notebook tucked in the top left pocket of his army field jacket. That little notebook contained all the words I learned. Every now and again, my dad would flip through the pages with me, and point out how many words there were. The pages were ruled with light green lines, and had multiple columns, each written in beautiful CAPS lettering with exquisite uniformity. All of the entries were in blue or black ink, and some of the words had asterisks by them -- why, I didn’t really know. When we’d pore over the notebook, my dad would laugh and always finish up by returning to the front page, reminding me that my very first word was moon. During our bike rides together, we would practice saying the words from the notebook. I was small enough that I could sit comfortably up on the top tube of the bike, balled up tightly, with my feet propped up on the handlebars. He’d use his forearms and knees to kind of box me in, and we’d whizz around the asphalt roads of Camp Libby. From time to time, he’d bring his head down low to my head, look in a direction, then point with one finger, and say a word... jeep! Then I’d look and repeat in a much smaller voice: jeep! Little by little, my vocabulary grew. The notebook filled up much faster than my dad had anticipated, so by the time I reached two, he decided to throw it away. 

I asked him one day, half jokingly, if he had ever seen anything supernatural. He looked over at me and nodded vigorously and said yes. I immediately shut my mouth.

“Yeah. In a cave in Turkey. I had a conversation with an old woman for what seemed to be an hour. She was dressed in formal attire, a sort of lacey black dinner dress with ruffles along the sleeves and neck. And there was something about her accent. She didn’t speak English like a local. And she definitely wasn’t Greek or American. She had an accent that I couldn’t for the life of me place. Any way, I could tell …

A few weeks before we were supposed to fly to the states, he bought me a toy airplane from the PX. He did this because one afternoon around lunch time, he saw me playing in the apartment with a gun. It was a bright silver cowboy style six shooter that one of my mom’s friends had bought for me. As soon as he saw it, he walked over in quick choppy steps, snatched it out of my hand, and without saying a word, snapped off the barrel. The pink skin of his face was tight, and small lines appeared above his eyebrows. My father had served two tours of duty in Vietnam, and the experience left him with very touchy about guns. After he broke the toy, I became very quiet, and slinked off toward the kitchen. I stood by a door jamb that led to the kitchen, and listened to the sound of oil sizzling against carrots in a cast iron frying pan. I stared at his knees from a distance, never looking up at his face, but I knew he was looking at me. Through sheer will power, I held back a river of tears. He walked over to me, knelt down and gave me a hurried hug, then quickly left the apartment, and closed the door very softly. He returned shortly afterwards with a small airplane. The size of it was perfect for my hand. It was all green, but had a red cross insignia on the tail. The propellers in the front actually twirled. The toy gun breaking incident had confused me, but when he showed up with the airplane, I was ok again. 

My sister Carmen was eight months old, and sick with the flu. In those days, Korean mothers used cloth diapers, and about one sixth of the passengers on international flights were smokers. My mom later told me that the first two hours of that flight were not too bad. The remaining 17 hours were punctuated by vomiting, diarrhea, crying, and a lot of dirty looks from strangers. The blouse and dress that she wore was damp from several trips to the bathroom. 

For the first few weeks at Fort Lee, we lived out of suitcases in one of the green and white wooden buildings the Army used for temporary housing for military families rotating into and out of the country. Each building had two or three separate living units clustered along a main hallway, like college dorms. The walls were made of cinder block, coated thick with high gloss paint that was smooth to the touch. The wood floors were painted white, and creaked in irregular spots. When you entered the hallway, especially in the mornings, the smell of pine oil could sting your nose. And the green wool blankets we were given reminded me of the scratch pads that I saw some of the soldiers using, but they were very soft. They were standard army issue, made of durable wool that must’ve been rubbed down and rendered gentle after countless washings. 

One day, I went to Fort Lee with him to help out with some light wall plastering in one of the buildings he worked out of. He spent 10 minutes or so showing me the basics of how to use sandpaper, compound, and a putty knife. Then he put me to work on patching holes. I got to meet some of his coworkers as I moved from room to room. They were all the same age as my dad, but none of them really spoke like him either. In one of the rooms, where there were several desks and phones, I noticed a dart board mounted on the wall. In the bullseye, there was a black and white newspaper cutout of the Ayatollah Khomeini. One of the soldiers was smoking a cigarette with his boots up on the desk, and said -- Hey kid, you know who that is? I told him it was the Ayatollah - the guy who kidnapped the people in Iran. He opened the top metal drawer of his desk, and handed me a few colored darts. I played for the rest of the afternoon.

One day in November many years ago - before tweeting and hashtagging were verbs - I had what is known as a “gut-level feeling”; one that I took seriously, but knew would be difficult to translate into a concrete set of enumerable steps. I wanted to write down a few of the things that I thought were interesting about my dad. I didn’t really understand why the feeling came to me, just that it felt right. It even filled me with pride at times, just for having had the ability to conceive of it. It was simple, but deeply personal. Neither unrealistic nor trivial. 

Six or so years later, during Barack Obama’s presidency, this was before Osama Bin Laden was killed, the writing idea cropped up again; this time as a bullet point on a list. It was part of a ten-item list that I emailed to myself every day as part of an effort to establish more productive routines in my life. Each item was written as an affirmative declaration in the present tense, and had a deadline associated with it that I liked to place inside parentheses. For example, I might write something like this: I can do 30 consecutive pull ups (10/1/2009). I held to this ritual unswervingly, and I’m proud to say that I did it every day for many years with extraordinary results. In every category except for my writing project, I was checking things off and achieving my goals. I began referring to my writing project as my collection of stories. But as I continued with my ten-item list emails, I realized I didn’t like the sound of my collection of stories. So I deprecated the term, and replaced it with the much simpler sounding writing project. My progress over the next 4 years was abysmal. Not a single sentence was produced. But I did see a huge spike in the completion of unscheduled gardening tasks and home repair projects. I also managed to catch seven squirrels in my backyard in a matter of two days.

The next few pages are the final result of me deciding to buckle down and just get it done. After meeting with a friend of mine at a coffee shop by the Brooklyn Navy Yards one day in the late summer, I made a commitment I wouldn’t be able to retract. I told my friend I’d give him an early draft of my writing project. 

Fort Chaffee Arkansas. I could no longer hear. My father was suspended in front of me. As they were expelled from his mouth, they became corporeal entities -- clumping up and recomposing themselves into noiseless spherical globs of energy. They undulated like individual breathing orifices, each possessing millions of luminescent fibrous filaments. The fibers glowed yellow, and streaked around their orb-like surface, sometimes disappearing. Over the course of several minutes, the globs joined together to form a larger shape. A moment later, my eyes went out of focus, and the shapes were gone. And my father was gone. Although I was conscious, I was vaguely aware that I was moving. With effort, I became aware that I was walking along a carpet. The carpet was suspended over an ocean, and to the left and right of me, mountains were raising up. I looked down to see a flotilla of large wooden boats. The carpet I walked along led to a set of stairs, which became an escalator. I was ascending up into the sky. I was now so high up above the water, I could perceive the curvature of the earth, and of the blue-black gradient that separated the atmosphere from what was beyond. I was still able to make out the details of boats and sailors down below - each moving along a trajectory of intent. And that whatever it was that was powering the boats and the conveyor belt, it was all somehow being channeled through my father’s mouth. When his words stopped, my body felt as though it had travelled an enormous distance. 

Much later in life, I would again experience that peculiar feeling, but only as a result of eating a small tab of paper depicting a pig carrying a suitcase. 

This story takes place a long time ago, far below the cold choppy waters of the Pacific Ocean, and takes place aboard a submarine. At that time, subs criss-crossed all the known waters of the earth. One of them, named the California Kid, was an American vessel with a crew of 20 sailors - which, by the way, included your grampa. 

And let me tell you, this crew had seen it all: from the rough unforgiving waters of the chilly north atlantic, to the penetrating calmness of the strait of Hormuz, tales of their bravery and daring were widely recounted with reverential awe. 

For over 12 months, the crew had travelled the oceans and waterways of the world conducting top secret scientific research for the Navy, and now, finally, they were preparing to return home to San Diego. 

“Waitaminit daddy, I thought grampa was in the army! Why was he in a submarine?”

“Well, grampa was asked” I said.

I was introduced to Martin Fierro in the fall of 1993, a few months after he was discharged from the military. I had been out of the army for a good 8 months, and was busy at the University of Illinois - Chicago, trying to get on the Dean’s list. When we met, we spoke at length about the military; about field exercises, jump school, jungle school, life in the barracks, and chow at the mess hall. I brought him a book - Thus Spake Zarathustra - and asked him to read the first chapter. When we met again, we spoke more seriously about school. I asked him what his plans were, and he responded tepidly, saying he would probably take one or two classes at the community college.

I gave him some tough love, and reminded him of what it was like to be out in the field for 6 months - not having a shower or hot meal - that to screw up his future by squandering time at community college with no direction would be a disservice to his unit. “Read as much of the good stuff as your brain will allow” I advised. Because of our shared military bond, I felt a very serious sense of responsibility for Martin’s future. No one had bothered to help me, so I was determined to do as much as possible to help him. He nicknamed me LRRP’s (long range reconaissance and patrol - pronounced LURPS). I’m pleased that he finished his degree in philosophy at Northwestern University, and continues to read voraciously.

When I met Reginald Poyau in 2003, I thought to myself: this must be the dumbest smart guy I’ve ever met in my life. He had a degree in physics, but no social aptitude. He’d frequently complain about how difficult it was to meet and date a girl in New York. We’d go to lunch together quite a bit, and talk about thermodynamics, relativity, and comic books. I remember distinctly one day - after knowing him for about a year - mentioning that there are certain problems that aren’t solvable by the application of reason.

“Like what?” he asked.
“Well, why is it that people choose to enter into relationships? Marriage, friendship, etc.” I responded. “It’s totally irrational. If you look at it from a purely engineering point of view, where’s the gain? It’s a horrible allocation of resources.”
“Yes” he concurred. But then he tried to frame the whole issue in terms of quantum probabilities.

There was a whole lot of yada yada after that, and several dozen follow-up debates, many of which occurred over some great bottles of wine. The central question I wanted him to ask of himself was: is it possible for a person to undertake a meaningful and positive course of action, and for the decision process responsible for that course of action to originate somewhere other than rationality or logical heuristics? What I was nudging my friend toward was a gradual acceptance of the limits of science as a suitable explanatory framework for all human questions, and to occasionally dispense with the ridiculous “science is the only thing worth talking about” attitude that was at least partially responsible for him not meeting a girl of his liking. This was my pet project for an entire year and a half.

In 2006, Reg got married to a girl he met on the subway. She was visiting from Switzerland, and they “instantly” felt an attraction. To my delight, he’s able to tell the story without once mentioning particles or forces of nature.

My ideal teammate would possess integrity, great communication skills, and the ability (and desire) to evolve.

I understand firsthand, how powerful its impacts can be - especially at developmental junctures. When I was 8 years old, I asked my father if he thought I was more like him or more like my mother. It was a silly question, clumsily intended to maneuver my dad into talking about what a great child I was. When he answered, I was stunned.

“Benjamin, children don’t belong to their parents. They don’t belong to a country or an ethnic group. Your mother and I, as parents, can only help you discover who you’re capable of becoming. You belong to yourself, and to the universe. It’s up to you buddy.”

These were some pretty heavy words for an eight year old kid, but my dad was not a man of levity. It wasn’t until I was 23, when I read the story of Abraham and Isaac in Kierkegaard’s  Fear and Trembling, that words electrified me in the same way.

Being a father myself now, when I think of setting my daughters on a path, I’d like to do things differently from my dad. In any writing workshop, one is told, “show, don’t tell”. This is the underlying pattern of how I interact with my daughters.

A person of integrity can always be relied on to tell the truth and to do what’s right - without external compulsion or reward. When I think of integrity, I think of my dad.

As a kid, I’d go for walks with my dad in the woods, and would ask him all about the things we’d see. We’d start with the big things - trees and birds - then get really really small - planaria and microbes, and hydrogen. He was the best teacher I ever had. When I was 8, I asked him why he married my mom. It took him 45 minutes, but the point became clear. He began with a story of a group of Aleutian island rats that lived on a single land mass, but because of rising sea levels, became divided into distinct populations separated by water. Some time later, the waters receded, and the rat populations reconnected, but they’d been apart for so long, they could no longer have children. I’ll never forget how he concluded that story - with a call to being responsible to a purely abstract purpose.

“Genetic drift, Benjamin. It’s our responsibility to the continuity of our species, to ensure maximal genetic diversity in our offspring.”

Growing up, my dad never allowed me to have a toy gun; he scolded me even if I pretended to shoot something with my finger. When I was 21 years old, home from the army, I found some of my dad’s old crumpled up class A uniforms in my parents’ closet. When I asked him about the medals, I learned that he volunteered for 2 tours in Vietnam, and had received the purple heart and bronze star. I also learned that some time in the 1970’s, he spent 6 months on a nuclear submarine doing classified work below the arctic circle, and later oversaw some military construction projects having to do with the Alaskan oil pipeline. And in 1986 during the Libyan air strikes, he “somehow” wound up in an F-16 in Turkey. I was amazed. My father was temperamentally the furthest possible thing from a pathological thrill seeker, and never ever spoke about his time in the military, other than retelling stories of riding his bicycle through the streets of Korea with me on his lap.

“Dad, why didn’t you tell me about this stuff before?” I asked.
“I never would’ve thought the army was for you. I’m glad you tried it, but I didn’t want to burden you with the expectation that that’s what I wanted for you. You had to decide for yourself.”

My dad was a strange man, sometimes appearing to be so distant, as to be visiting from another planet. The level of his honesty and total lack of affectations had the effect of scaring people in social situations. When I returned to college from the military, I decided to enroll in a survey class with the department of classics. One day, the professor told the story of Cincinattus the Roman, and I realized why I loved my father so much.

I used to be quite a talker. It was a highly irritating compensatory mechanism for overcoming shyness. One day, a friend of mine - Arvin - said something that changed me.

“If everyone realized that we all have a great deal more to learn than we have to teach, we’d be living on a planet of goddam geniuses.”

I now realize what Arvin was trying to tell me. Being quiet is difficult. Listening to others is a skill. It’s no surprise that across cultures, a person who speaks well, but never listens, is generally regarded as a jackass. Someone who can do both is a great story teller, a great observer of human nature, and a friend of man. The ability to tell lots of compelling stories to lots of different people is what I’d call a pretty good litmus test for being educated. We learn from stories in ways we can’t learn from say, mathematics text books. Because stories must be told, they never leave out the most important part - the human component.

If a person has this trait, there’s nothing they can’t become. For me, this goes hand in hand with intelligence, and is truly at the core of what it is to be human. These beautiful words express it better than I can:

I live my life in growing orbits
which move out over the things of the world.
Perhaps I can never achieve the last,
but that will be my attempt.

I am circling around God, around the ancient tower,
and I have been circling for a thousand years,
and I still don’t know if I am a falcon, or a storm, or a great song

Integrity is vital, because a leader has to delegate responsibilities to his team, and that requires trust. If you’re asking someone to do something, you have to be able to trust that he/she will get it done - even if you’re not standing in the room.

Great communication skills among team members is indispensable. Remember the story of the tower of babel? Steven Pinker compares humans’ ability to communicate as the ability for one person to leverage the contents of the central nervous system of another person without ever having to establish physical contact. Where would Einstein be without Newton? Or Newton without Galileo? Or Galileo without Euclid?

I chose the ability (and desire) to evolve because I see its value every day at work. When you work in a dynamic field that constantly encounters new situations, new problems, and new challenges, it’s critical that a person have a general problem solving aptitude, as opposed to rote knowledge that can only be deployed to a fixed number of known problems. Software is a field like this, and I’m constantly reminded of the value of my college degree in philosophy. As a matter of fact, the most gifted programmers I’ve ever worked with tend to come from non computer science backgrounds, and consider themselves generalists; people who tended to study things like physics (yay!), biology, history, music, and in one unique case cabinet making. Also, having the desire to evolve is a tacit recognition of the possibility of perfection. People who feel this may or may not believe perfection is possible, but they feel the draw of pursuing it. And that’s worthwhile.

Preparation for the SHSAT 2021 (in Covid times)
On Wednesday 1/27/2021, my daughter will sit for the SHSAT. This is a 114-question math and english test, used by the 8 specialized New York City high schools as the sole determinant of admittance. All other factors you’d think might play a role – grades, teacher recommendations, attendance, extracurricular activities, financial need – are ignored. We’ve been preparing in earnest since last August. This blog post recaps the highlights of our experience, and tries to answer a few common questions parents might have.
What does my kid need to be good at?
My advice to parents for ELA prep
How I prepared my daughter
Sample test content we used
What is the SHSAT?
What are the specialized schools like?
Are the schools diverse?
How to get sample SHSAT test content
The importance of Schoolwork

What is the SHSAT?
The SHSAT is a three hour standardized test, designed by Pearson, and is comprised of two sections: math and english.
It’s the only criterion used for admissions into one of the 8 specialized New York City high schools (which is nuts)
It’s only used in New York City, reminding everyone yet again, that New Yorkers move at a different operational tempo; one that is sometimes too hard to explain to others
Over 30,000 8th graders per year take it across the 5 boroughs, kids get 1 chance to take it, and there are no do-overs

What are the specialized schools like?
They are all really hard to get into, and operate like feeder schools into the ivy league. Laguardia, because it’s a performing arts-focused school, doesn’t require the SHSAT. But it does require an in-person audition and/or portfolio submission.
Generally speaking, if you’re unfamiliar with the ins-and-outs of New York City’s education system, you can think of the specialized schools like public school versions of Hogwarts where…
Stuyvesant is like Gryffindor
Brooklyn Tech is like Hufflepuff
Bronx Science is like Ravenclaw

Are the Schools racially diverse?
No. Black and brown students are overwhelmingly underrepresented. As expected, kids from well-to-do families have a built-in advantage. See the numbers yourself. 👉🏽More info here.
Racial composition of Stuyvesant High School

How to get sample SHSAT test content
Downloadable pdf’s of old versions of the SHSAT are made available on the New York City department of education’s web site – right here on this page (direct pdf link is here). The official sample content does a good job of providing a snapshot of the skills being assessed, the range of the content, difficulty level, and the degree of ambiguity you can expect with open-to-interpretation kinds of questions commonly found in the ELA portion of test.
PDF of the official SHSAT, made by Pearson. Old versions of the test are available on NYC’s web site.Click here
Pretty good content, a bit easier than Kaplan, but on par with SHSAT. Amazon link
Fair, not as good as Barron’s. Amazon link
Lots of repetitive kinds of math problems presented consecutively, giving the impression that editorial was “phoning it in”. Amazon link

The Importance of Schoolwork
For a moment, think of your kid’s test-taking success using this analogy: their odds of surviving a random assault in a desolate location – for example: around Port Authority at 9pm on a Thursday. Obviously, most 13 year olds aren’t professional cage fighters, so the single greatest predictor of success in this hypothetical scenario is base fitness level – eg: strength, speed, stamina, endurance; not to mention composure under duress. Think about it: when someone charges at you in a blind rage, you can’t hop into a time machine and sign up for a gym membership. Fitness is either there already, or it’s not. People who are fit have earned it over a long stretch of time, as a result of good habits.
Likewise, your kid’s ability to succeed at any proctored test (like the SHSAT) will largely be determined by their base level of academic preparation – eg: their proven ability to grind out homework day in and day out; of doing the unglamorous work of showing up to class and turning in assignments on time.
My daughter is fortunate. She attends a middle school with a strong focus on STEM, where kids are expected to be doing algebra in the 6th grade. Her reference group is composed of high achieving students. Parents and teachers expect a heavy workload that emphasizes repetitive skill-based drills. As a result of doing this kind of work 👇 – aka: “repping it out” in sports lexicon – kids are doing 2-variable parametric equations and introductory polynomials by the 8th grade.
Bottom line – if your kid doesn’t do his/her school work, but expects to do well on a test like the SHSAT, it’s a lot like an obese person expecting to get “ripped” without curbing their donut intake. Not really a goal, more like a wish.

What does my kid need to be good at to succeed?
ELA
Ability to identify the main concept(s) from a reading passage, and mentally summarize on the fly
Recognizing and understanding common literary techniques: foreshadowing, insinuation, symbolism, allegory, metaphor
Understanding the importance of author’s intent, and the role it plays in interpreting texts – eg: what is this person trying to communicate to me? why?
Bonus – possessing enough cultural literacy to understand that textual interpretation hinges on unconventional literary techniques; like irony and hyperbole
Tips:
Have your kid read – real books, newspapers, and magazines – for example, the CIA World Fact Book has a ton of great introductions < 1,000 words long, many of which are exceptional examples of clear purposeful writing and summarization techniques
Level up your chitchat – figure out how to translate highfalutin concepts from art, literature, philosophy, history, math, and science into conversations about things your kid cares about: tiktok, sports, pokemon, youtube stars, super heroes, etc.
Math
Basic arithmetic and multiplication tables up to 16 x 16
Understanding order of operations (aka: Pemdas), GCF, and prime numbers
Converting statements into math expressions, deciphering a word problem, and figuring out what is being asked
Basic geometric concepts like complementary/supplementary angles, similar triangles, and how to use the Pythagorean theorem
Perimeter/circumference, and area calculations for common 2-D shapes like rectangles, triangles, circles, and parallelograms
Mean, median, and mode
Basic set theory applications in computed probabilities

My advice to Parents for ELA Prep
🔥ELA is a dumpster fire. Full stop. Accept that, and do your best to optimize. If you’re rich enough to afford a manny + a nanny, just get a tutor – preferably one who reads like they’re fluent in the classics, but thinks like an engineer. If you’re not loaded, do this:
Take the ELA test yourself – completely, and under the same time constraint that your kid will face – then grade your responses
Home in on the low-hanging fruit such as the grammatical revisions section. There is no reason you cannot easily prepare a kid for rote, mechanical language skills like accurately identifying subject/verb agreement. Get a sense of what those skills are, and get good at them
Figure out why your answers diverge from theirs – carefully read through Pearson’s justifications for all the answers you got wrong; you will likely be amazed by the obtuseness of their reasoning; also by the flagrant stupidity of selecting works of satire for a test that putatively measures 13 year olds’ ability to comprehend texts. Does an 8th grader really have a good enough understanding of irony to understand Mark Twain’s intent when he opines about the stupidity of ants in a Tramp Abroad? Call me crazy, but I don’t think anyone under the age of 30 really understands what the fuck irony is.
Leverage all of your anger from doing the above 3 things constructively: namely, calibrate your own Pearson ELA “kentucky windage” bullshit compensators with the goal of enumerating a set of steps that you can communicate to your kid in order to achieve these objectives:
Eliminate red herrings right away
Narrow down an answer to 2 plausible options
Encourage your kid to read a LOT. Here’s what my daughter reads:
joke books, comic books, Harry Potter novels, sci fi and fantasy, some really bad fiction
The New York Times, the Washington Post, National Geographic
Connect unobvious word play activities with language development
crossword puzzles, word scrambles, scrabble
Tik Tok lip synching (I’m serious)
Listening to Rap and/or reading poetry

How I prepared my daughter
When she was in the 7th grade, I started gathering pdf sample tests, and ordered a few SHSAT prep books. In the beginning, my approach was totally haphazard and improvised. SHSAT books can be very helpful, but relying on books without having a system is the biggest mistake you can make. You have to buckle down and get methodical. Below is a summary of what we did.
I tagged and built up a database of test content
Using the SHSAT sample tests as a starting point, I input all of the questions into a database. Then, I tagged each question with descriptive terms like:
area-perimeter-volume
data-analysis
decimals-to-fractions
equations
fractions
geometry
etc…
I developed more content, customized to my daughter’s needs
After initially entering a small set of questions, and familiarizing myself with the essential rubrics (eg: tags), I developed my own content, using these basic problem characteristics:
No images
Easily translatable into templates, making it possible to programmatically generate hundreds of permutations
Have high frequency in the test AND constitute a source of known weakness
For problems that were more time-consuming, I took the time to create sample videos and detailed explanations of the solutions. I did this on a limited basis, only if there was value there.
I gave regular assessments & constantly revised our preparation based on the results
Once a week, we’d squeeze in either a mini (20’ish questions) to a full-blown math+ela test (114 questions). The critical thing was to measure the outcome so that the following week could be planned. Why? So that my daughter could spend her time shoring up her weaknesses; not getting good at things she’s already excellent at. Here’s what we did:
After each weekly assessment, I recorded all of the following:
The date of the assessment
Total number of questions: eg: 47
Final score: eg: 42/57
For each question answered wrong on the assessment, I recorded my daughter’s perceived difficulty rating (1-5 scale) – my goal was to drive this number down over time (on average)
I looked at all the wrong answers grouped by tag, and by difficulty rating – to get a good idea of how the following week’s worth of preparation should be structured
I identified areas of focus: things like: percents and equations
During the following week, we drilled only the areas of focus:
Each night, we did between 5 and 20 problems, around a single area of focus. For example, a lot of kids have difficulty making sense of expressions that have to do with percents (eg: % of something, % increase/decrease, % faster/slower, etc)
A rectangular field had a length of 80 meters and a width of 50 meters. The field was recently enlarged, with the length increased by 15% and the width increased by 10 meters. By what percentage was the area of the field increased?
Each night, I printed a 1-sheet (sometimes 2 sheets) of problems – about 10 minutes of work
We’d talk through the problems afterwards, and I did my best to keep things relaxed and low-stress: to reinforce the idea that this stuff is super easy
Fully-masked tests to avoid any surprises like…
The strap around my ears is super itchy after 45 minutes
My nose gets runny, and I have a hard time diagramming!
etc…
We examined our progress, made adjustments as needed, and celebrated success
It was important to constantly remind my daughter that every bit of work she did was equivalent to making a small deposit into a savings account; that those efforts would one day render a huge cumulative advantage on the day of the test, like finally getting to make a withdrawal from that savings account. Key to that idea, was demonstrating that it was in fact, already happening. I regularly showed her with the data I was collecting:
Assessment 8/20/2020
Total Correct Math: 33
Total Correct ELA: 33
Raw Score: 452
How your score ranks with your top 3 choices:
Choice 1: 😢 – 15 questions away
Choice 2: 😢 – 6 questions away
Choice 3: 😢 – 5 questions away
Assessment 10/25/2020
Total Correct Math: 49
Total Correct ELA: 42
Raw Score: 547
How your score ranks with your top 3 choices:
Choice 1: 😢 – 6 questions away
Choice 2: ✅
Choice 3: ✅
I built a Math app
At first, I tried doing everything with spreadsheets. This didn’t scale well, so I built a simple math helper application one weekend. At first, it started out as an SPA written in Bootstrap and Vue, with problems stored as .json files on the local file system. Lots of hand-written code and css, with tons of imperative dom manipulators. By the time I reached 100 questions, I realized I needed something a lot more robust. Below are how things evolved slowly… over time.
Version 1: Google docs
Quick and easy to set up, which was great
Looked like crap, and had to be fiddled with constantly
Unwieldy and totally unscalable
Version 2: node.js
Created in a weekend
node.js with express (no templating)
jQuery handling most of the layout and presentation imperatively
Questions stored as .json files on the local file system
Media stored locally
Version 3: node.js + Vue
Written in node.js, using express as a backend and Pug as a templating engine
Uses Vue, Bootstrap, and MathJax for the front-end
Questions stored on a cloud-based Postgres database with API endpoints acting as the intermediary between the application and the database
Access to questions and quizes now behind authentication
Media stored on AWS
I reminded my DAUGHTER that she has got this
As a dad, I’m the founder, CEO, CTO, and CMO of my daughter’s fan club. Prior to giving her an assessment, I remind her of the inevitability of her success – in print, on top of the test booklet, using words like the ones below:
One story I love to share with my daughter is the one of how Michael Phelps integrated visualization into a daily ritual that became a centerpiece of his mental discipline. He did this at the urging of his coach, Bill Bowman, before all the gold medals. As I know the story, Bowman instructed Phelps to establish a nightly routine before bedtime, one in which he’d mentally rehearse and visually reconstruct all of the steps leading up to the perfect race. He told him to imagine it in as much detail as he could, as though he were watching a video tape. Phelps complied. He also improved as a swimmer. The routine became so ingrained, Bowman would simply have to say the words “Get the tape ready” in order to prime Phelps into the frame of mind he would use to become a world champion.
I don’t think everyone can talk themselves into becoming a gold medalist, but I’m a big believer in the power of deliberate mindful practice. And although standardized test success (SHSAT, ACT, SAT, GRE, etc) is not something that I feel has intrinsic value, the ability to summon the discipline and effort to pursue a goal in a systematic fashion is definitely a valuable competency that is transferrable to multiple domains.
We “tapered” toward the end, and budgeted in goofing off time
Just like runners prep for a marathon, I wanted to time my daughter’s preparation so that she’d peak a few weeks before the actual test. We also had “cheat days” where we sat around and watched tv. My daughter is a lot like me in that she needs a ton of sleep, so allowing her to get plenty of rest was a priority. I also made sure to let her know that her emotional well being and happiness were way more important than cramming in 30 more minutes of drills. So some nights, we just talked about math and reading. Other nights, we’d go upstairs with a bowl of chocolate chips and watch tv. Below are some of our favorite things to watch:
The Outsider
Raised by Wolves
The Queen’s Gambit
The Mandalorian
Mr. Robot
Wanda Vision

Sample test content we used
Below are some screenshots of question content, as it renders in the context of the app I built. Click or tap on any image to see it in greater detail.

Implicit Bias
Take the implicit bias test.
Shortly after finishing Dr. Jennifer Eberhardt’s wonderful book Biased, I took an implicit bias test – one centered around race and weapons; the focus being whether or not I am biased to associate specific racial groups (whites vs. blacks) with a higher likelihood of carrying weapons.
It took about 7 minutes to complete. As it turns out, I (along with 6% of respondents) am slightly biased to associate whiteness with weapons. There’s a graph below, along with my attempt at an interpretation of the results.
Implicit Bias: Race & Weapons
Why I associate Whites with weapons, and Blacks with harmless objects – slightly
Like many people, I’m pretty attuned to current events. Since about 2000, I’ve made it a point to only read the news — never to watch it on television. Below is a summary of my interpretation of 20 or so years of reading news related to race, policing, and violence, expressed as an easy-to-follow over-simplification:
When whites get upset, they are free to put rifles on their back, then go shopping at Walmart; or storm city hall; or congregate openly in front of the police decked out in paramilitary garb; or volunteer their services to the police
Sometimes, whites like to rhetorically muse on the possibility of murdering, kidnapping, or torturing politicians on Facebook – without offering the full details of their plans – then act very surprised if anyone is bothered by this
The police seem to possess an inexhaustible supply of credulity when the behavior of such white people is brought to their attention, and lavish these people with the benefit of the doubt up the wazoo
The lesson of items 1-3: white people can say and do all manner of menacing things, even while walking around armed to the teeth. And if they happen to become afraid and mistakenly kill someone (out of fear), well, that kind of mistake is par for the course because their fear is totally reasonable
My Background
I grew up in the south during the late 1970’s. Our next door neighbors, a mixed couple, had a cross burned on their front lawn by the Klan when I was about 3 years old. At the age of 8, though I went to a private school, several of my classmates had ancestors who fought for the confederacy during the American Civil War. Of those I was close friends with, some held fanatical beliefs supporting the glory of the Lost Cause, and conflated them with their sometimes mixed feelings of white supremacy. It was an intricate tap dancing routine around the issue of outright racist behavior. I never once thought of those friends as racists, and still do not. I don’t think the word racist is, in general, useful when invoked in conversations where 2+ people don’t already see eye-to-eye.
Regardless of my small circle of private school white friends, one thing about the world in which I lived was clear to me, and every grown up I knew: blacks and whites were perfectly capable of being cordial in their every day dealings, but beneath that thin veneer of southern politeness was the always-present possibility of explosive violence; violence commissioned by whites against blacks, whenever there were excessive displays of black assertiveness that caused white discomfort. Further, that everyone around me held the rock solid belief that if things got out of hand, armed local law enforcement would naturally align with the white perspective.
My dad was a pragmatist who thought highly of Reagan, but much higher of Eisenhower, Nixon, and Rockefeller. He was a lifelong soldier, and served three tours in Vietnam. He often spoke of the superiority of Western civilization, and of Americans’ duty to uphold and carry on a core set of  traditions, originating with the Roman republic. He was a humanist, and believed not so much in the perfectibility of man, so much as the inevitable lessening of mankind’s stupidity through historical processes. He was, and is, a big fan of the Protestant work ethic, and believes that every person alive must earn their way into heaven on their own steam; that simply showing up to church doesn’t amount to shit. When I was 8 years old, he explained to me that I was adopted, and that my biological father was Puerto Rican. He hated living in the south, and, to my surprise, never once considered voting for Donald T****.
My mom was an immigrant from South Korea, born in Pusan one year after the start of the Korean war. She learned English by watching American movies, mostly westerns, and thinks that Reagan was the best president of all time. She loves watching Turner Classic movies, and heavily favors John Wayne, Clint Eastwood, Charles Bronson, and Yul Brynner. She is enamored with the idea of tough good guys punching out bad guys. The United States is the greatest country in the world because we consistently punch out the highest number of bad guys. That is a cornerstone of her autobiographical reasoning.
At the age of 18, I enlisted in the Army as a combat engineer. More than any other experience, being in the military shaped my perceptions on race, otherness, and tribe. I realized that skin color, though important, can easily be superseded by different categories; that our sense of selves is completely malleable, and that our identities are capable of moving between overlapping rings of affiliation that are contingent on our situational context. For example:
Who has an American passport and who doesn’t?
Who’s seated in first class and who’s not?
Who’s from the west coast and who’s from the east coast?
Who speaks Spanish and who’s a native English speaker?
Who’s from the south and who’s from the north?
Who went to college and who didn’t?
At the age of 48, because of a DNA test, I confirmed my Puerto Rican ancestry, and connected with one of my cousins who lives here in the continental United States. She and I are good friends, and chat regularly. I also discovered that my biological grandfather was black. Knowing this hasn’t changed my ideas of who I am, but it enlarges the scope of conversations I’d feel comfortable having with people I have yet to meet. And probably the circle of people I might reach out to when having those conversations. In that sense, the information in the DNA test has the real potential to change who I might become.

My best friend
A letter to the children of my best friend
As Christmas approaches, I’ve been thinking a lot about memory and gratitude. There’s a lot of neuroscience research that tells us that memory doesn’t work at all like instant-replay; it’s more like a whimsical reconstructive do-over. This is why eyewitness testimony is frequently thrown out in courts of law. This should neither be surprising nor alarming.
I’d add though,  a glass-is-hall-full corollary of this observation is that we are the authors of our own reality. And when it comes to friendships – the people who really mean something to us – we are both subjects and authors. We get to bear witness to the transit of remarkable one-of-a-kind humans as they pass through the world.
2020 is the first year I buckled down, and sent out holiday cards to friends and family. Strange, right? When it came to my best friend’s family, I wanted to send a note that was a bit more than just the boilerplate Happy Holidays. It became a typed letter to his children.
Dear ***** and ***,
The last time we all met was in New York City. We took a long walk along the water by the West Side highway, past the Whitney museum. On the grass, we played a short scrimmage of football. Your dad lobbed a pass to Charlotte. She caught it, then ran to score a touchdown. It was a great day. This letter is addressed to you because I want to let you know, in my own telling, how much your dad means to me.
With Love, from New York City,
Ben WillenbringYour dad’s friend
Levendis
Four years before I met your dad, I read a remarkable short story by an American writer named Harlan Ellison. The main character, Levendis, pops in and out of history, making small alterations with no apparent rhyme or reason. The story is told as a series of dated reports, like diplomatic cables, concisely detailing his various interventions. They each leave the impression of a possibly ironic parable – at turns, playful, righteous, random; at other times just plain bizarre. For instance, one day he raises the IQ of every human on earth by 40 points, only to lower it by 42 points a day later. Levendis’ motives don’t neatly fall into categories of good or bad. They are just… unfathomable. Later in the story, toward the end, you find out that Levendis is an emissary for an even more mysterious force, simply known as the master parameter.
His final report says this:
In Greek, the name Levendis means someone who is full of the pleasure of living. When I think of your dad; of how he managed to surface in my life, of how he could be such an amazing person, I think of Levendis.
Bone Marrow
When your dad was in his early twenties, he saved the life of a complete stranger. He did so at no small personal risk, and with zero financial compensation. He barely told anybody about it. We were roommates at the time, living in Chicago in a two-bedroom apartment above a nightclub called Double Door. We were constantly broke, despite working as waiters at a fancy restaurant called Red Light.
One day, a letter arrived from a hospital. Someone needed a bone marrow transplant, and as it turns out, your dad was a match. The letter didn’t say who the recipient was, but mentioned that without the operation, that person would die. Back in those days, even though bone marrow transplants were fairly standard, there was the very real risk of death from unforeseen complications. The operation itself wasn’t painful, but recuperation could be quite difficult. At the time, I thought he’d throw that letter in the trash. But after thinking it over, he decided to take a week off work to drive to Detroit. Once there, he checked himself into the hospital, underwent surgery, and recuperated for a few days. Afterwards, he spent a couple days with his family, then drove back to Chicago. He didn’t talk about it a whole lot. Many of our coworkers had no idea why he was even gone.
A year later, another letter arrived. This time, from the person who received the life-saving bone marrow infusion. I remember the day your dad received that letter. He read it aloud, and I was there. It was a simple and heartfelt expression of genuine gratitude. As I listened to the words, I felt myself bursting with pride. Pride at just bearing witness to the moment; of having a friend capable of doing something so good and selfless for another human being. It made me feel like I was a good person just for knowing your dad.
The Big Enchilada
In 1998, your dad worked part time at a small graphic design studio in Chicago. They mostly did brochure layouts for a local pharmaceutical company. The work had an uncomplicated meat and potatoes midwestern ethos; trifolds with linear fades and stock photography showing trustworthy white people in boardrooms with their sleeves rolled up and pencils dangling out of their mouths. Your dad wasn’t impressed, but saw an opportunity to clock some billable hours and learn some new things. That is one of the traits I admire most about him by the way: he’s a genuine Grade-A New York City hustler who will work circles around most people alive.
The studio manager, Vince, was only 8 years older than your dad, but constantly asking him for advice on restaurants, books, fashion, and the latest trends – like this new thing everyone was talking about called THE INTERNET.
One thing you have to realize. Back in those days, most people didn’t own a cell phone, didn’t even have the ability to connect to the internet. The founders of Facebook were still in junior high school, Google had just received $100,000 of seed money to get up and running, and a company called Amazon just started trading on the NASDAQ at $18 a share. Your dad was THE GUY when it came to explaining all that stuff to Vince and the other Photoshop grinders at the studio.
Vince’s dad, Vince senior, picked up on that. He was the real boss – the CAPO, the old man, the head honcho – an-old school button-down man who enjoyed calling the shots, handing out cigars at the end of a big job, showing up with flowers for the secretary unexpectedly, or just razzing you about your shirt or your girlfriend, or telling you to stop using the word DUDE so much (said it made a man look weak).
One day, Vince senior pulled your dad aside, and quietly asked him to put together a proposal for a big job – something new – something the studio had never attempted before: web design. He said he couldn’t really trust Vince junior to pull it off.
Your dad was on it, and I helped him put the proposal together. That was the first time I got to see his strange super power in action: immunity to the effects of sleep deprivation. There’s a fifty-fifty chance you guys have this power too by the way, but it doesn’t really come in handy until you’re 18 years old.
Back in those days, we weren’t what you’d call systematic about HOW we worked. We just went at it really, really hard. All day, all night from our apartment. We’d buy meals at 4am from across the street at a place called Wicker Dog, just as people poured out from the nearby bars and clubs. We’d wolf down some chow, then keep plugging along into the next day, fueled on burgers and fries. I’d be wiped out by 1pm, take a nap, then wake up at 5pm to see your dad still typing away at his computer. “Hey, check this out…” he’d say. Then we’d repeat that for the next 48 hours. By the second day, the two of us started calling the work by its Vince senior code name: the BIG ENCHILADA. I cannot tell you how many files were created with the name big_enchilada_v19… big_enchilada_v20… etc. Soon, everyone at the studio picked it up. Word got back to Vince senior, which made everyone a little nervous. But it wound up making him happy. That’s just how the old man was.
A month before Christmas, we emailed our best version to Vince senior for final approval. He read it multiple times, then called your dad. There were a few things he didn’t understand. In some spots, he just wanted to exert some editorial control over the final product, and make a suggestion on how to word something differently – gently putting his fingerprints on it in a small way. The way your dad handled those conversations was a master class in diplomacy. Most people (especially young creative men) are very protective about their work, and the minute someone comes along to suggest a change, even a small one, it’s natural to react with anger. Your dad didn’t do that. He realized that allowing Vince senior’s edits to make it into the final proposal was the best possible course of action. It cost us nothing, and it would make the old man feel like he had won a victory. It also made him a more enthusiastic advocate for the success of the project. Genius.
After a day or so, we reached a final revision, and the proposal was handed over to Vince junior for printing and binding. On that matter, Vince senior again laid down the law:
And he held up his hands, as though cradling an invisible cannonball. Vince junior nodded his head up and down. The rest of us nodded, and did our best to pantomime heaviness. Yes, yes, it has to be a TON. And so, the final printed leather-bound BIG ENCHILADA weighed in at somewhere between 18 and 22 ounces – roughly equivalent to a high-end restaurant-grade porterhouse steak.
Within days, multiple ENCHILADITAS arrived from the printer. They were delivered to the client for review, and by the following week, we all received word that we had been given the green light to move forward. I was completely stunned. Vince senior and junior were thrilled. Your dad made that happen by the sheer force of his will. That, plus a strange super power and a state-of-the-art twenty-pound MacBook laptop with 128 MB of ram. All I wanted to do was sleep for two straight days.
Twenty Percent
You really get to see what a person is made of when they’re under pressure. In 2008, the global financial system nearly collapsed. Your dad was running a business with about a dozen employees (myself among them) right when things went bonkers. Many of our clients were having difficulties, pulling back on projects, cutting down staff; some went out of business entirely. I remember thinking: how can any business get by right now? All the money in the world is drying up, people aren’t spending, people are scared.
Your dad called an all-hands meeting. I was sure he was going to announce that he would have to lay off a few of us. He did something different. He gave us the facts. He told us about the company’s financial situation: told us which of our clients were in trouble and which weren’t, how much revenue we could count on month to month, and for how long. Then he went on to explain that all of us would need to make a choice between the following two options:
A few of us would be laid off, while the rest would continue on, business as usual. We’d have no idea in advance who would be laid off, but the owners would do their best to ensure a fair outcome
Everyone would take a voluntary 20% pay cut until further notice – that is, until the country was out of the weeds – whenever that was. We’d revisit things in a year no matter what, and if the coast was clear, we’d go back to business as usual
Another thing: if we chose option 2, it had to be unanimous – every single one of us had to be completely on board. Your dad scheduled one-on-one meetings with everyone over the course of the next week. We were spread out in so many places: Chicago, New York, LA, San Francisco, Paris, London, Vancouver, Toronto. He didn’t judge or try to persuade. He just listened and heard people’s concerns.
In less than a month, he called another meeting to announce the decision. Option 2 – that was the path we would all take – for better or worse – no looking back. The salary cuts would go into effect immediately. We adjusted. We made it. Together.
A year later, the company your dad had built was back on track. The economy was improving, our clients weren’t as skittish about taking on big projects, and a young black man named Barack Obama was the new President of the United States. Things were looking up.
A couple years later later, I found out something I didn’t know. During that difficult time in 2008, back when your dad was trying to keep everything together, he decided to sacrifice a larger percentage of his own salary to save his company. More than the 20% he was asking of his employees. Again, he didn’t tell anyone.
Having this new piece of information, I replayed memories of conversations your dad and I had; memories of my visits to him and his family at his modest apartment in Venice. I remember his hopefulness about the future; of his excitement whenever he’d talk about the day he would move the family into a bigger place, so that his son could have more room to play. And of carving out a space for his wife, so she could focus on her art; and of future dinners together with family, where everyone was seated at a super long table, all the grandparents and Uncle Dave there; and maybe even another baby joining the family. And I remember his determination to make that happen, no matter what. One day, all together, in a big house.
I am crying as I write these words now, because I can’t express to you how much I admire your dad. I hope that you know that there are many, many people in the world who feel exactly the same way I do. He loves you so much.
With Love, from New York City,
Ben WillenbringYour dad’s friend
The Neuroscience of Memory and Eyewitness Testimony
The Atlantic: Life’s Stories (and how autobiographical reasoning works)
Washington Post: Eyewitnesses aren’t as reliable as you might think
New York Times: In Eyewitness Testimony, Memory Fails Us
Harvard: Eyewitness Testimony and the Neuroscience of Memory
NCBI: The Nueroscience of Memory: Implications for the Courtroom
Simply Psychology: Eyewitness Testimony
The Invisible Gorilla Project

The Presumption of Savagery
The week after George Floyd was killed by a police officer, I was sitting on my stoop, chatting with my neighbor. She’s a retired FDNY ladder chief in her sixties. She grew up here in Bedstuy. Our homes share a party wall and fence line. Before the virus, when the weather was nice, I’d often see her carrying supplies back and forth from her house next door to her two other properties, less than a quarter mile away. She’s a grandmother, a home owner, a real estate investor, and restaurant owner. She is black. And she said something that day that took me by surprise.
The time I fired an M16 in Camden, NJ
Typical diesel-powered 5 ton truck, similar to the one I rode in the back of. This one is “open”, but there are canvas coverings that allow the bed to be fully enclosed.
In the late summer of 1991, my unit was returning from a JRTC rotation at Fort Chaffee, Arkansas. I was in the back of a five ton dump truck with other members of second squad third platoon. Every man under the rank of E4 was stuffed in the back, along with his M-16, ruck, and duffel. There were several trunks and canvas bags filled with our gear: concertina wire, shovels, post hole diggers, picks, cutters of various sizes, crimpers, gauntlets, a pneumatic tamper, grappling hooks, ropes, D-rings, and camouflage netting. There may have even been some C4 in there. I had no idea if that would even be, strictly speaking, in compliance with all the uh… civilian laws. But no one really gave a shit. We’d only be on the civilian roads and highways for another hour and a half tops. The back of the truck was like a carefully arranged sock and underwear drawer. Men were closest to the tailgate, followed by the soft gear like duffels, rucks, and camo netting, followed by the heavy stuff that could crush your hands. Along both sides of the truck, ran two low benches. I sat on one of them at a spot right by the tailgate. Although we had the canvas coverings on, the night air was nice, so we left the back completely open. Conversation was still on the happenings at Fort Chaffee, where my company played the role of an OPFOR sapper unit.
What Joes talk about in the back of 5 ton trucks
Yo man, you remember that kid Potts? The one we captured on the… what, second day? [looking around] Yeah, the 88 mike from the 25th ID. The morning we got him, and we stopped so Harvey could go take a shit, I peeked around the corner of the truck, and it looked like a fuckin’ tail was growing out of his ass. [laughter] That thing must’ve been eighteen inches long. My fuckin’ GOD.
Dude, have you ever seen H****k do that thing with his dog tags? Fuckin’ sick. He takes it apart so it’s just one long chain, then snorts one end up his nose and coughs it up out of his mouth. So now, he’s got one end sticking out of his nose, and another end coming out of his mouth. [laughter] He pulls both ends of the chain back and forth, and starts singin’ a fuckin’ song!
Did you hear what happened with H**den? That fuckin’ piece of shit tried getting out of the box before we even went in. Made up some shit like he couldn’t feel his foot. [disbelief and contempt]. So he gets to the hospital, but he gets an appointment with an E6 - special forces medic. Ranger tab, jungle school, the fuckin’ real deal. Dude sticks a needle into Hayden’s foot, and bam! Tells him, you’re going back to duty son.
What in the fuck is up with W****r? [knowing glances] Dude, have you seen his pillow? There’s like a yellow halo around where his head is. Fuckin’ fuck…! [inviting everyone to let that sink in] You need to talk to him man. I don’t know when that motherfucker showers, but it’s like, weird, you’d think he would stink like dog shit. But he don’t. What’s up with that?
Camden, NJ - where “carjacking was invented”
Shortly after crossing the Ben Franklin bridge, we stopped off at a McDonald’s to get some chow. The neighborhood reminded me of Waukegan, IL – lots of check cashing places and storefront displays with small things on white pegboard; streets littered with fast food wrappers; bags blowing around in the wind. When we piled back into the truck, someone announced that we were in Camden, and would need to stay on side streets for a little while before getting back on the tollway. A minimum of three guys popped open the top pockets of their LBE’s, looking for unspent magazines. I instantly knew what they were up to. Leighton was driving, so he probably wouldn’t give a shit. There were no NCO’s in our truck, so no real grownups. I opened up my right cargo pocket, where I had stashed one magazine of blanks at near full capacity. I held it in my hand for all of one second, scanning the faces of my friends to see if they were serious about doing what I knew they all wanted to – then put it into my rifle.
None of the guys in my squad were from Jersey, so the only things we knew about Camden, we learned from Specialist Duncan in first platoon. He had a car, and was a little older than us – twenty three. He released a lot of air when he spoke – a fact I learned one day when he was talking to my buddy Hardesty. I was standing 2 or 3 feet away. When Duncan laughed, his breath came at me like a focused blast of sweaty butthole and pancake syrup. I was 19 years old, and up until that moment, had no idea it was possible for a human being’s mouth to smell like an ass. Duncan liked shooting his mouth off about all the hoes in Camden who was down with OPP and doin’ all kinds of nasty ass shit. Camden! Wall to wall niggas’ that’ll put a cap in yo’ ass, just for some mo’ crack money. All of Duncan’s stories followed this basic forumala: hoe + fucked up shit + cap in the ass. I’m not sure who it was, but someone else at some point in the custodial chain of Camden lore (someone white) added something to Duncan’s canonical works – maybe Waterman or Barnes –  I heard they invented the carjacking in Camden!
Still sitting down, I held my rifle on my lap with the barrel barely sticking out of the truck. I figured that way, it would be a lot less flagrant. My buddy D sat on the opposite site of me, same setup. I had maybe 15 or so rounds, he had about the same. We agreed to wait until we were nearly on the tollway entrance before going fully automatic, and only if there were no cops in sight. When that happened, we depressed our triggers right out into the open night air, slightly above the cars on a major highway in New Jersey. I can’t even be sure if anyone slammed on the brakes, swerved out of the way, or anything. Me and D were laughing our asses off, and ducking into the back of the truck by the camo nets.
The Presumption of Savagery
As a 19 year old soldier, I fired an automatic weapon out of an open military vehicle without so much as a single wtf thought bubble. I did so under the cover of an alibi many people now recognize as patently absurd:
These people don’t care, they’re used to this kind of shit. The place is a hell hole any way. Besides, nobody will notice. These neighborhoods are so loud, it’s like I’m just letting off some firecrackers. No harm, no foul.
It’s embarrassing to admit that I have anything in common with the 45th president of the United States, but in this case, I do: an implicit bias that is steeped in the presumption of savagery on ppb (persons possessing blackness). Ironically, black people are not exempt from this themselves. It’s a weird phenomenon, but documented by very smart people. I’m guilty of foisting this presumption on to ppb, and even inwardly directing it at myself (note: I am technically a ppb). Unlike #45 though, I view the reflexive presumption of savagery as a problem – one that I actively work to expose in greater detail in my own life.

My carelessness doesn’t have has consequences
When my neighbor shared her comment with me on the stoop, I heard it as an indictment against carelessness – not a condemnation of the FDNY. It rang true to me because I could see that very same carelessness had wormed its way into my own life, with no explicit invitation. It doesn’t take much imagination to see how the consequences multiply when other members of our society permit this carelessness to go unchecked.
“They are all (thick-skinned) thugs” (medical edition)An emergency room doctor who speaks with a middle-aged black man about a fever and flu-like symptoms, asks the man for a subjective assessment of his own pain, later corrects for “blackness”, and finally recommends a discharge with a prescription for Motrin; the man dies three days later at his home (this is a true story of one of my friends’ friends). 40% of medical students (currently) believe that black people are dulled to painread more
“They are all thugs” (sports edition)NFL fans who react to a black quarterback doing a touchdown celebration as a direct frontal assault on western civilization read more
“They are all thugs” (scholastic edition)A teacher conducting online zoom class notices a bb gun in the background of her 9 year old black student’s bedroom; she panics, kills the video stream, and recommends expulsion read more
“They are all thugs” (police edition)A woman walking her dog in Central Park who doesn’t like what a black birdwatcher said to her, then calls the police feigning tears, explaining that a black man in the park has just threatened her read more
“They are all thugs” (political edition)Republican senators who react to a black president wearing a tan suit, calling it a national disgrace, but later stay very quiet when a white president vigorously endorses grabbing women by the pussy read more
“They are all thugs” (vigilante edition)A chubby latino man in Florida who “keeps an eye” on things in his neighborhood notices a black teenager – Trayvon Martin – exit a convenience store. This young man went out to buy some skittles. Martin was wearing a hoodie, and this fact + the fact that Martin is a ppb  arouses the suspicion of the chubby man, who is documented as saying… “This guy looks like he is up to no good or he is on drugs or something”… and later “these assholes, they always get away.” Moments later, the chubby man kills the teenager. He claims he was justified because he was afraid for his life read more
A good read (If you’re interested)
There’s a long-established intellectual tradition that predates American slavery that basically says this:
“Of course blacks are less human than white Europeans! There are multiple shifting rationales for it! As a group, they are <boilerplate bromides here>. Black suffering isn’t really human suffering – they are such fakers! Everyone knows their pain receptors are dull! modulate your compassion and trust accordingly.”
Most people with a high school education have heard of the Tuskegee airmen, but you may not have heard of Dr. Marion Sims – a man who submitted enslaved black women to experimental surgical techniques without anesthesia. Ibram X. Kendi has done a great job of recounting the historical determinants of this complicated subject matter in a great book called Stamped from the Beginning.


Zoom WOD 11
Friday, Nov 20, 2020 9:00am EST - the eleventh installment of the Zoom WOD (workout of the day) with my friend Eli. This one began a half hour early, and included some truly epic chitchat. I also logged a personal running best for running around the block in 2:19 – a full 5 seconds faster than my previous fastest time.
The army crawl deters the cat from loitering on the upholstered chairs (out of frame/not pictured).
Sets & Reps
Taking it easy on the First set
My partner was a bit slow to return on his first run of our workout, so I asked him about it.
Eli, reacting to me questioning his “taking it easy” on the first tun. The second one was faster by a few minutes.
Chit Chat Recap
On the topic of expertise.
Eli: So it turns out the less you know about a topic, the less good you will be at recognizing how much you know about a topic.
Ben: [puzzled – not by the subject matter – but by Eli’s casual usage of  phrase “the less good you will be”]
Eli: [without skipping a beat]… So if you talk to an EXPERT about climate change, they will talk about a lot of uncertainty about how “we know this, but we don’t know this… and THIS could be problematic about our model…” but if you talk to someone who knows NOTHING about climate change, they will be CERTAIN that they know everything there is to know about it.
Ben: [now catching up to Eli] Right, yeah. I didn’t know that had a name, but I’ve read about that also. Generally, the more informed you are, the more you caveat your statements and hedge.
Eli: And they did some sort of survey, and a lot of average guys said that they could beat Serena Williams at tennis.
Serena Williams has won 23 Grand Slam titles. 12.5% of randomly selected men claim they could score a point on her in a game of tennis.
Ben: [laughing]
Eli: The reason they think they can beat Serena Williams at tennis is BECAUSE they’re not very good at tennis.
Ben: Uh hah. [still laughing]
Eli: IF they were GOOD at tennis, they would be like “Oh No, she’s very good – I couldn’t beat her” because they would be better able to estimate her skill versus their’s.
ESTIMATION!!!
Ben: ESTIMATION! [pointing at the screen wide-eyed. I was working hard to come up with a reference to some related thought to poor estimation that I had read a couple months back in Daniel Kahneman’s book, but couldn’t dig it up]
Eli: And then they also did another study that if you look something up on the internet, it creates an illusion that you know more about everything.
Ben: Yeah! Headlee writes about that.
Eli: [nodding in solidarity] It’s so funny to me. So funny.
Ben: I love that part! It’s like… “How do tornadoes work? Well, let me tell you!”

ORF Specification for Writing bug tickets
William of Occam, medieval logician and scholar, famous for being stingy with words. Probably would’ve been a fantastic author of dead simple bug repro steps.
ORF is an acronym for Occam’s razor format. It is not real. There is no chance it will become a W3C standard. I made it up years ago (jokingly at first) when I started managing a backlog. But I enjoy acronyms, so I held on to it. Here’s the quick and dirty:
Some bug tickets are unclear despite containing lots of information. Some are very good, despite being tersely worded, sometimes profanity-laced – even ungrammatical. I wanted to better understand why: what makes a good bug ticket good, and a bad one bad.
This blog post is an informal summary of those findings, and a breezy presentation of some simple patterns that have worked well for me and my current teammates.
ORF Guidelines
In general:
Follow a dead-simple template
Explain everything that isn’t obvious (but follow Occam’s Razor)
Don’t introduce red herrings
Are badly written bug reports really a problem?
Yes. In the U.S. alone, the annual estimated business cost of bad writing is around $400 billion. It's likely that the proportional share of that burden on software companies is even higher, when you consider the difficult-to-measure compounded costs of allowing bad writing to leach into the workflows of people who produce secondary pieces of writing. For example:
Technical writers revising manuals because of users' inability to understand how a piece of software works
Product owners and dev teams huddling to clarify details of poorly worded tickets
Developers conducting technical investigations and code reviews, later rendered moot/unnecessary
Automated processes provisioning servers (and wasting electricity) to run CI builds against code that is later removed
Attorneys convening to draft, polish, and revise EULA's – only to repeat this process because of a misunderstanding
It sounds absurdly obvious, but it’s worth spelling out: engineering teams’ ability to solve problems is crucially dependent on clearly-worded descriptions of problems. Any team member should be able to quickly infer intent from written artifacts with a minimal time investment.
The following recommendations zero in on a tiny fraction of this problem – writing effective bug repro steps for dev teams.
1. Follow a dead-simple template
When writing bug repro steps, you should move toward an organizational standard (the simpler the better!). Here’s the one I’ve been using for years:
Repro Steps (sample)
Assumptions
Your target site is either a local docker setup or a standard CloudOS provisioned site
Your target site is running v8.18.x or higher, and uses the default template
Steps
Login as the default admin user
Navigate to any entity query page (eg: Projects => {Project} => Shots)
Set the page mode to either list, task, or card mode (using the mode switcher)
Toolbar => Fields => Manage Fields
Wait for the first modal dialog to render
Click + Add a new field
Enter a 256+ character-length string into the New Field Name text input
Click Next
Wait for the second modal dialog to render
Click ‘Create Field’
Expected result
Client-side validation catches the excessively long field name before sending it to the server, and after clicking ‘Create Field’.
The UI presents a clearly worded warning, prompts me to correct my mistake, and allows me to resume the field creation workflow where I left off
No server error results
Actual result
The configure field dialog appears momentarily, then goes away, replaced by a server error dialog
The Server error dialog displays this message: Please pass on the following id for the error so we can trace what happened: etc.
The page is in a recoverable state, the Manage Fields dialog is still present on the page, and no modal overlays are visible. There are no JavaScript errors in the console.
2. Explain everything that isn’t obvious
The “teenager disarming a bomb” analogy
When I was in the army, I handled C-4 as part of my job. I was eighteen years old, and up until that point, had only seen explosions in movies. I was still new to the military, scared, and hungry all the time. The EOD specialists at Fort Leonard Wood fully appreciated all of that, and calibrated their instructions accordingly. They kept things simple, gave me (and everyone else) a single instruction at a time, used plain language, spoke in short sentences, and always used the active voice. They understood that people’s lives might one day depend on the things I learned with them. I think of that experience when I write instructions for a general audience – for total strangers whose incoming level of expertise is unknown; people who might be experts, but could also be interns or new hires.
In general, when you’re writing for a person who might be a total stranger to concepts and procedures you take for granted, a person who will likely be reading your words under duress, with a lot of other things on her mind, show empathy for that person. And don’t disrespect her time. You will one day be that person.
2.1. Follow Occam’s Razor
There’s no need to get fancy here: just keep it simple. With respect to bug repro steps, what’s the minimum number of instructions you could provide that would guarantee that a reasonably smart high school student could follow your steps, and reproduce your bug? Whatever that set of instructions is, that’s your goal. That’s the secret sauce. Pretend that your listener is a player piano, and your steps are the punchcard instructions. They should be mechanistic, unswerving, and precise.
2.2 Create awesome Titles
The title of a bug should be to the point and information-dense. Model your’s off of newspaper headlines. Don’t use subjective words like broken, busted, strange, weird, buggy. In particular, don’t write things like this…
Example title: Groups acting weird on this page “Weird”? This is not a clue? Also, avoid the word “this” like the plague when referring to things. If your bug requires the existence of a snowball that some kid named Vince made last thursday, its reproducibility goes out the window once we hit 40º. In general: This page might not exist “tomorrow”. Suggested fix: Grouping headers with long strings do not properly truncate on entity query pages
Example title: Bug happens when creating a note while viewing a filtered page of notesThis is circular and unhelpful. When composing a title for a bug ticket, don’t use the word “bug” unless it is a literal string value. Be literal and crystal clear. If clicking a button results in a potato materializing on your desk, say that. Don’t say “totally random thing appears out of nowhere after clicking a button.”Suggested fix: Creating a note while viewing a filtered page of notes results in a server error
2.2. Use the active voice and keep things short
When it comes to writing repro steps, keep each step as short and atomic as possible. If necessary, break apart complex multi-step procedures into sub tasks.
The following is too long…
- Go to preferences page and find the Big Data setting. It should be in the advanced section. You might have to click around a bit.- Clear out Big Data, save the prefs, then reload the page and go to a new project.
This is preferable…
- Go to the preferences page- Scroll down to the accordion section title “Advanced”- Click “Advanced”- Locate the text input preference labeled “Big Data”- Click into the text input and clear out its value- Scroll all the way up to the top of the page- Click “Save Preferences”
2.3. Avoid technical jargon
Don’t write stuff like this…
- Up all your services- In a second shell, tail the production log and grep for “retry”- After you see 50 or so lines, kill the passenger queue- Check the DNC for any unicode characters
Bug tickets aren’t invitations to a dork bonanza. Don’t assume that everyone knows how to start and stop docker containers, grep text files, tail a log file, etc. There are dev teams where such things are common knowledge, but not every software engineer on every type of team would know how to carry out instructions like the ones above.
2.4. Use Visuals
Screenshots and/or screencasts (videos) can be a huge boon in cases where a complex series of terminal commands is unavoidable (ie: tail the production log). Sometimes, a 15 second video or animated gif is a real life saver. If it takes you 30 minutes to gin one up, that’s a time investment that could have enormous downstream benefits.
2.5. Provide everything needed to carry out the steps
If code or specific files are required, provide them. For example…
- Go to the uploader at <base url>/upload- Upload a .dpx file and wait for it to transcode- The service will fail on 2-frame .dpx files output by Toon Boom Storyboard 6
In the case above, if you don’t provide a 2-frame .dpx file output by Toon Boom Storyboard 6, guess what… this bug will immediately be closed with status = f**k you.
How to fix this up…
-  Go to the uploader at <base url>/upload- Upload the sample file attached in this ticket – toonboom6_bug_repro.dpx - Expected result: details…- Actual result: details…
2.6. Don’t give instructions that require backwards time travel
For example:
- Create a polymorphic field on Sequence, with the system name field_xyz that points to Asset and Element- Create a Sequence with the bare minimum of attributes (ie: don’t set its field_xyz)- Delete the Sequence with a CRUD.retire- Undelete the Sequence with CRUD.revive. - Login to the ruby console, do an active record search for all event logs created within the last 4 hours- Make sure your system clock is set to a time with a UTC offset of -5 or lower
That last instruction – the one about setting your system clock – needs to be first. The entire (onerous) set of steps is rendered pointless if that single step is not done first. Never ever waste people’s time like that. If the person reading your repro steps happens to be from New York City, expect to receive a delivery of dog shit at your house or office.
3. Don’t introduce red herrings
3.1 A “red herring”, in case you didn’t know, is…
3.2. tip: Don’t diagnose as you enumerate
Offering theories about what might be causing a bug – as you’re enumerating the steps to reproduce it – is very distracting. Volunteering your own diagnosis is welcome, just tuck it away in a different section of the ticket, apart from the repro steps. It can be a valuable addition to aiding any subsequent efforts at root cause analysis.
3.3. tip: Don’t inject opinions into repro steps
Color commentary is fine, and adds spice to tickets. I actually enjoy reading highly opinionated tickets. But when it comes to repro steps, don’t do this. You can certainly offer some editorializing in the bug description, but keep repro steps mechanical, robotic, and unopinionated. Sprinkling statements like this is so unhelpful!! doesn’t help an engineer reproduce a bug. It just provides a glimpse into the inner workings of your mind.
Examples of this…
- Open the browser console’s network tab- Click into the grid’s quick filter text input, and type a single underscore character- Examine the multiple crud requests that are spawned in the network tab- Notice the JavaScript errors that repeatedly show up! - OMG!!! It is 2020, can we please have better static code analysis for this kind of stuff?!!

Zoom WOD 10
Friday Nov 6, 2020 - the tenth installment of the Zoom workout of the day. I was running late, but managed to get online a tiny bit after 10am (our scheduled start time). Eli had a meeting at 11 with a person I’ll just call “Bill” – so we cut the chit chat short. :(

Daily Work consecrated in Routines (and a Dockerfile!)
My work setup includes this 1958 Olympia SM3 I picked up from the Gramercy Typewriter Company
I’ve been doing a lot of reading on the topic of attention lately. In particular, Cal Newport’s Deep Work and Greg McKeown’s Essentialism: The Disciplined Pursuit of Less have heavily influenced my thinking on the need to establish new habits enshrined in routine.
What I’m trying to achieve
The Routine (English)
The Routine (as Dockerfile)
Preliminary results (tbd)
What I’m trying to achieve – generally
To reacquire the ability to learn hard things, and produce at a high levelOver the course of 2 or so years, I’ve reached a point of attention exhaustion – thanks to a firehose of requests, reminders, alerts, pings, and messages coming at me from a variety of digital doodads – the sum total of which has diminished my ability to focus; to be able to discern what is very important versus somewhat important, versus not-at-all important. I intend to rehabilitate my concentration by establishing a rock solid routine that emphasizes working deeply in areas/problems that elicit my highest possible contribution. The first iteration of that routine is described below.
Specifically…
To make flaky tests in CI less likely than the probability of being struck by lightning (0.033%)
The Routine
1. Typewriter (computer is closed)
The first thing I do is head downstairs to the kitchen. I make myself a single espresso and drink this as I make breakfast – 2 eggs over easy with either 1 cup of Oatmeal or 1 full plain bagel (toasted). I make 3/4 of a pot of French Press coffee, and once breakfast is done, head downstairs one more level to the garden apartment. I draw the curtains, shut the doors, then walk over to my typewriter. To my left is a short stack of paper, along with previously typed reports. I call them “reports”, but they are simply the artifacts of this stage of my “build process”. Once I’m sitting, I begin in this manner:
Do a full carriage return
Position my coffee pot and cup so that it’s reachable; a little bit to the right, and behind the backstop of the carriage return
I insert a clean sheet of paper into the feeder, advance it until about 1/8 of an inch pokes above the guide
My first typed output is a timestamp, using this date format – Friday Oct. 30, 2020 7:42am
I do another carriage return, then begin typing. I impose no rules on what comes out, but attempt to keep an even steady flow of grammatically correct sentences.
I end at a natural point of narrative closure, or at 30 minutes, whichever comes first
The typewriting exercise functions exactly as a martial arts kata or yoga warmup. Because it’s mentally arduous, it’s the perfect way to prime the central nervous system for several hours of single-threaded work requiring concentration. Typewriters don’t have cut and paste, delete, or undo functionality –  a fact that forces you to engage with a presence of mind that is simply not required by a keyboard hooked up to a computer. With typewriters, mistakes cannot be swept away by a backspace key. And so the mental effect is similar (I imagine) to juggling steak knives. Although the content of the typing  isn’t crucial, I’ve been trying to “guide” this process to engage my reticular activating system.
2. Pencil & Paper (computer is closed)
The point here is to engage in a bit of creative free-form thinking and doodling, culminating in identifying a small handful of both high-value and medium-value goals I’ll target in the next few hours – while the iron is hot. As I draw, the following items are within reach:
2 large sheets of white butcher paper (approximately 36” x 36”)
3 mechanical pencils (.5 and .7mm)
3 Blackwing Palomino pencils
1 Kum two-stage long point manual sharpener
4 Colored pencils – orange, blue, green, red
A 12” ruler
2 highlighters (yellow and orange) and 1 red sharpie
3. Pre-mortem (computer is open)
This has three parts:
Zero in on a subset of the high-medium value items identified during pencil & paper, and define them clearly enough so that each one has a “done criteria”. For example…
Create a proof of concept Webhook using AWS lambda that can return either json or html to an incoming POST request with this type of payload (details)
Have a draft pull request done for <ticket xyz> regarding <abc>
Draft an email of essential intent to <manager xyz>
Enumerate all the things that could derail your day, say each one out loud, then say the word “no”. For example:
Desire to turn on Slack or to take a peek at your email
Desire to check LinkedIn, Instagram, Facebook, Instagram, news, stocks, etc.
Desire to follow up on an item / request that I just remembered from the other …
Translate all of the items in #1 (above) into discrete Omnifocus Tasks
4. Do the work (computer is open)
This is becoming quite mechanical, and I love it.
On a piece of paper, draw a schedule of the whole day, beginning with the current time. Use the first chunk of time for your high-value work. Sprinkle in blocks of time later on for low value/impromptu tasks (Slack requests, conversations, email follow-ups, etc.)
Open the computer, but turn OFF Slack and Outlook
Execute on high value stuff. If I begin to drift, I verbalize the question: is this essential right now?
Move upstairs, stretch the legs, and say hello to the family.
Transition to normal work mode - with its interruptions and short feedback cycles. Continue to ignore the items that could derail you (stock tickers, facebook, etc.) but be available to people over Slack and Email
Occasionally look back at my penciled-in schedule to make alterations as needed
5. Shutdown Routine (computer is open)
At around 4pm, I begin to transition into shutdown mode. I wrap things up, and mentally prepare to end my day. By 5:30, I’m ready to be done. In order for that to happen, I must go through all of these steps:
Groom my Omnifocus Inbox, and get it down to zero (move stuff into Project containers)
Inspect all outstanding Tasks I wanted to get done for the day. If 1 or more are incomplete, jot down some notes, defer the completion date by a day, then say the words “Consider it done”. This allows my brain to decouple from that Task so I don’t spend CPU cycles worrying about a pending unresolved commitment (ie: the Zeigarnik Effect)
Visually tally up all the tasks I completed – using Omnifocus – screenshot this, and text it to myself (as evidence that my day was in fact, a win!)
Close my computer
Say the words “Shutdown complete”
The Routine (as dockerfile)
I imagine running docker build . on this badboy with my brain as the host machine.

Corona Virus Dispatch from NYC, Day 232: The Zeigarnik Effect
Zeigarnik Effect
Our minds quickly forget finished tasks. However, they are programmed to continually interrupt us with reminders of unfinished tasks. These intrusions constitute the Zeigarnik effect.
The Zeigarnik effect is the name given to a psychological/cognitive phenomenon whereby a person’s ability to carry out a task measurably diminishes as a result of the residual interference of an unfinished task (or thought). For me…
memories
words
proper nouns
metaphors
stories my daughters tell me
possible inventions
badly composed news headlines
product taglines
tacky song lyrics
words I hear coming out of the mouths of people around me
Stuff like that ☝️gets in my head, and takes up residence right alongside genuine tasks/household chores. And if I don’t somehow force closure on this nonsense, I wind up burning through CPU cycles haunted by the residue of pointless enigmas, just ricocheting around inside my skull, occupying real estate that could be put to better use.
My countermeasure: Lists
I write down lists – lots of them – to get things out of my head, and into a system. Kind of like the ghostbusters’ use of containment units. That is my primary use of Evernote: as a palliative to the Zeigarnik effect, squarely aimed at caging the goofy things that wind up getting into my thoughts. Below are a few examples.
Examples
1. Things said by a real kid named “Vince”
Vince was one of my daughters’ classmates during the third grade. I never met him, but was told he liked saying strange and funny things. I imagine most boys have a thought process very similar to Vince’s. I just couldn’t wrap my head around any of it – not for a lack of trying.
2. Things said by Vince’s teacher, Mr. M***z
Mr. M***z was a substitute teacher in the New York City school system in the year 2015. I met him once, and clocked him as a man who enjoyed providing off-the-cuff color commentary. Whether or not he’s still employed by the department of education or spending time in the rubber room, I can’t say. But the quotes are accurate.
3. Unusual names of real people
Avenue Meyers - a worker on the Casad farm, located in Madras, Oregon who hauls equipment parts
Marijuana Pepsi Vandyck (PHD recipient from Beloit, WI. Her dissertation was on uncommon African Americans names. She currently lives in Chicago, IL.)
Creflo Dollar - American televangelist and founder of the non-denominational World Changers Church International based in College Park, Georgia. His face regularly appeared in New York City subway print advertising on the 4, 5, and 6 trains between the years 2001 and 2010.
Bunny Mellon - famed landscape designer and BFF to Jackie Kennedy.
Maynard Von Spiegelfeld - manager of Pizitz, Alabama dept. store where Roy Moore, former Alabama Senator (R) stalked teenagers.
Flint Dibble - An archaeologist who focuses on food from the Classical Greek world. This guy has an amazing web site.
Dick Trickle - Nascar driver who, for many years, raced around the “short tracks” of Wisconsin.
Danger Fourpence - pro soccer player from Zimbabwe whose twitter feed is littered with adorable typos such as… “Danger be on de move to london”
Lavoy Finicum - man killed by the FBI during a car chase that followed an armed standoff at the Malheur National Wildlife Refuge.
Pinchas Bard Wigdor - insurance adjustor in Brooklyn, NY who handled my basement flood claim in 2013.
Tinsley Mortimer - New York City socialite who has regularly appeared on the TV show Real housewives of New York City.
The Zeigarnik effect in action (for me)
Wife asks for help rearranging some books on a bookshelf
I begin this task. 10 minutes in, as I reach for Where the Red Fern Grows, my daughter calls  from downstairs asking for help with her math homework
“Hey dad, can you help me with this math homework?” – sure, sure…
I set aside what I’m doing to do something else, with the full intention of coming back to the bookshelf
I go downstairs, take a look at the homework, and notice linear algebra. Cool!
I take a seat, and start talking about concepts like slope, y-intercept, and various forms of equations
My thoughts return to Where the Red Fern Grows
I recall my fourth grade teacher reading this book to me and my classmates
I remember the day she read the part about Old Dan sacrificing himself to protect Little Ann from a mountain lion – and how I cried; all the kids cried actually
I realize I’m off task, and snap back to math homework
I resume my discussion with my daughter of the concept of a line having undefined slope; of how this is possible
In a nested process – the one from upstairs – I attempt to resurrect a nugget of data associated with my fourth grade teacher –
What was her name – Ms. Bailey!
It occurs to me that my teacher’s first name was Kay. Kay Bailey
This realization spawns a new thread involving the politician Kay Bailey Hutchison. But wait!
Is Kay Bailey Hutchison a Democrat or Republican?
Could the two women be related?
Was my fourth grade teacher’s first name really Kay?
Which nested level am I supposed to be on any way?
‽
The Zeigarnik effect generalized
User engages in Task n (bookshelf)
User is interrupted to start task n+1 (math homework)
User leaves task n in a state of partial completion, and sets task n to task n-1
User prioritizes task n+1 (math homework), and sets it to the new task n (the object of primary focus)
User begins work on the new task n, but is still devoting resources to task n-1 (bookshelf)
User ruminates on task n-1 in an unguided stream-of-consciousness manner, resulting in diminished resources for task n (math homework)
Ruminating on task n-1 results in new tasks being spawned:
task n-2: What was the full name of the fourth grade teacher?
task n-3: Is the politician Kay Bailey Hutchison related in some way to the teacher?
etc…
For each new task arising from ruminating on task n-1, a recursive application of this model on task n-1 results in it becoming a new task n

Zoom WOD 9
Friday, October 30, 2020 - the 9th installment of the ZOOM WOD (workout of the day). Today, we did 3 circuits, but did not go outside for the running portion because it was 38º in Detroit, 43º (and rainy) in Brooklyn. We decided to substitute 1 minute of high intensity toe-tap drills, which was a great alternative that allowed us to squeeze more work into a shorter period of time. Also, I got my early voting done yesterday! Chitchat recap is here.
I waited in line for 1 hour in the rain on Thursday, Oct. 29 so that I could vote.
Sets & Reps
Chit Chat Recap
Eli: I need to do that today. I'm voting today.
Ben: Man, I dropped my wife off at work this morning, and saw a line of people, a third of a mile long. Waiting in the rain. The poll site didn’t open until 7, and these people were waiting in the rain at 6:20.
Eli: When you went, did you bring an absentee ballot and drop it in a box? Or did you just go in and vote?
Ben: No, in New York, they changed things this year - for the primaries - and I didn't realize that until the day before yesterday; that anyone can early vote. No justification. You just show up. So that's what I did.
Eli: Early voting for us is just filling out a ballot at home, and then dropping it off to the place.
Ben: Is that what you're going to do?
Eli: Yeah, for us, the show up and vote in person early doesn't happen. I'm basically just doing the postman's job for him.
Ben: [holding up 2 socks to the camera] Do you see the letters on these socks?
Eli: Are they left/right letters?
Ben: YES.
Eli: I love that.
Ben: That is like having women's and men's t-shirt sizes. It doesn't really serve the public good.
Eli: No man, the left and right socks are important. If you have big misshapen feet like me, and you stretch out the socks in totally different ways depending on the foot, you don't want to get the socks mixed up.
Ben: ?
Eli: Because the weird spot where your left big toe flares out is going to go on your right foot's pinky toe.
Ben: I don't buy that. I think people like to have stuff like that because they like to view themselves as high performance machines like... Lance Armstrong, and they think that by investing in super-advanced gear, they’re gonna’ see some NEXT level shit.
Eli: That is truly delusion.
Ben: Affirmative.
Eli: Um, have you got that book about Do Nothing?
Ben: Not yet.
Eli: I spent all week doing nothing, reading the book about Do Nothing.
Ben: [laughs] I am just now getting back into reading. So I don't want to overdo it. When I'm done with my current book, I'll for sure read Do Nothing.
Eli: [sensing I may be full of shit] Which one is the one you're on now?
Ben: [totally prepared with a reply] It's the Weirdest people in the world book. I'm like 50 pages away from being done [this is true, 100%].
Eli: Well, the Do Nothing book and the Essentialism book go really really well together. It's like they fill each other’s gaps. The things that Do Nothing doesn't have, Essentialism has, and the stuff Essentialism doesn't have, the Do Nothing book has.
Ben: I'm gonna' order it today, and I will notify you when that task is complete.
Eli: Arright, are we doing this? Is this happening?
Ben: Yes, do your thing.

Zoom WOD 8
Friday, October 23, 2020 - the 8th installment of the ZOOM WOD (workout of the day). Today, we did only 2 circuits (at my request) because of me being completely wiped out from a heavy squat workout a day earlier. Chitchat recap is here.
Remembering an episode of Fight Science from 2010, I rigged up my own low-tech version of an oxygen-starved fine motor control test using darts.
Sets & Reps
Chit Chat Recap
Let’s waste some time before working out
Ben: Look at my jazz hands. No, wait… spirit fingers.
Eli: Sparkle motion?
Ben: Oh man, my cat has a gallstone.
Eli: Who does?
Ben: My daughter’s cat.
Eli: What’s his name?
Ben: DeSoto – like Hernando deSoto.
Eli: Does he have to get surgery?
Ben: Well, there’s a special kind of food that’s designed to dissolve it. There’s a chance it won’t work. Then there’s surgery.
Eli: Yikes. You ready?
<Workout>
Post Workout Chit Chat
Eli: What’s with the darts?
Ben: I saw this episode of fight science –
Eli: What show?
Ben: It’s an old show on… FX or something… I think it’s called Fight Science. So in the show, there’s a former Army Ranger… he’s in this bariatric chamber that’s simulating 30,000 feet altitude, and then he comes out, and he does a rifle accuracy test. And the point is, that fine motor control as well as concentration goes off a cliff as oxygen levels begin to dip below like… 97%.
Eli: Right
Ben: So right after that last run, I had five darts stashed in my running pouch. And as soon as I got through the door, still being winded, I did 5 consecutive dart throws to simulate the Fight Science episode, and I got a tight little cluster.
Eli: Oh. Does that mean that you weren’t really pushing yourself really hard in terms of oxygen?

Corona Virus Dispatch from NYC, Day 221
I’ve started reading a book which is rapidly dominating every moment of waking thought. It’s called Essentialism: The Disciplined Pursuit of Less. In a nutshell:
Stop saying yes to 99.99% of things you agree to
Be judicious about what you say yes to, but go all in
Design guardrails that insulate you from pointless/low-value work
My plan to work out (86 that)
This morning, after dropping off Charlotte, I took 96th street to cut through Central Park, then headed down the west side highway so I could find a 2 hour parking spot somewhere not too far from Chelsea Piers for a morning workout. After twenty minutes of circling around and around from Bethune to 14th street, not finding any parking, I came back home.

Corona Virus Dispatch from NYC, Day 218
Challenge of the day
For years, my bike-mounted coffee holder was a hair too big for my Kleen Kanteen. Today, I fixed that problem using some gymnastics tape I had upstairs. As is almost always the case, a low tech no-frills solution worked. My dad would be proud.
The other stuff
Woke up, had coffee, a bagel, and lox. Spoke with Maya, and agreed that we are going to make chocolate chip cookies today. Quietly reveled in the fact that I would not do a bit of exercise – just walking, biking, and some goofing off.
Did a quick huddle with Maya on her (personal) rotten tomatoes score of Pet Sematary (the 2019 version) - which we watched last night. She gave it a 60, I gave it a 55. Then we discussed a short list of movies that would likely break a score of 90. Here’s that list…
The Prestige
Inception
Arrival
The Ballad of Buster Scruggs
The Big Lebowski
Fixed my bike mounted PDX beverage holder
Biked to Coop, got groceries, and tried out the new cargo bags on my Tern GSD – they were awesome. I arrived at 11:10 am, waited in line for 20 minutes, then got in and out with a total of 2 boxes and a case of sparkling water.
Maya and I wound up taking careful measurements of our litter box in anticipation of ordering a cabinet-like enclosure. Later, that plan went south because we found out that our litter box is 1/8” too long for any of the enclosures we looked at. Then, we found a goofy plastic dome-shaped unit for $29 on Amazon. We ordered it, and right at checkout, realized that shipping was calculated at $168 fucking dollars. We walked around the corner instead, and bought something from the pet store for $20.
Prepped the chocolate chip cookie dough around 1pm with help from Maya. We use a recipe that stipulates 3 parts dark brown sugar to 1 part white sugar; and this is the reason the cookies come out so chewy. We got done with our dough prep in about 20 minutes, put it in the fridge to chill, and cleaned up.
Baked the cookies around 3pm. I ate 10. Maya had maybe 2 or 3.
I printed out the 2021 SHSAT Sample Test B, and gave it to her, then left to go get some kitty litter with Charlotte. We took the bike, and got to Park Slope really fast – probably in under 15 minutes. On the way back, I ran over some broken glass just before crossing Atlantic Avenue. Thankfully, the bike has Big Bens on both the front and back wheels.
Graded Maya’s practice test, went over the problems she got wrong, then took some notes for myself that I plan to use for this week’s review. Below is a recap of some areas we plan to revisit:
Compound inequalities & Absolute value inequalities
PEMDAS
Always write out formulas for area – DO NOT confuse Diameter for Radius
Modulus division that runs counter-clockwise
Cumulative probabilities that are don’t reset
Similar Triangles and ratios
Mapping permutations in table format
Shifty number theory problems involving odd/even exponents and positive/negative products
Had takeout from the Malaysian restaurant on Grand Street, just around the corner from the girls’ old elementary school in Nolita. The total bill was $80 - which suggests to me some pandemic price gouging.
Pinged the OGSG slack channel with some work / play pics that predate the acquisition. There were some good ones, and a great video of one of my buddies giving me a mohawk at 4am in Venice. The company was small, and I used to drink in those days.
Picked and ate 4 thai chilis from the garden with dinner

Zoom WOD 7
Friday, October 16, 2020 - the 7th installment of the ZOOM WOD (workout of the day). Today’s meetup went a bit long, because of some unplanned chitchat pre and post workout. A recap can be found at the bottom of this page.
The cat is laying low this week because he’s on antibiotics, and wearing a recovery cone.
Sets & Reps
Chit Chat Recap
I am doing “an experiment”
On the need to psyche oneself out.
Eli: I’m doing an experiment today. I don’t feel like working out at all. I’m totally grouchy, and so I’ve told myself - OUT LOUD - that I’m going to work out really slowly.
Ben: Okay. Let’s see about that. (see notes on “The Anti Mel Gibson” below)
Laugh Tracks
On the decline of a TV sitcom staple.
Ben: Do shows have laugh tracks any more?
Eli: What about two and a half men?
Ben: … You mean that old show with Charlie Sheen?
Eli: They replaced him with… that other guy.
Ben: 5 years. I give laugh tracks 5 years tops, then they’re toast.
The anti-Mel Gibson
On the need to have an effective visualization anchor for summoning the will power to make it through a workout…
Eli: I don’t think you fully appreciate how little I care about orphans.
Ben: Fair enough. Orphans is my thing. And D-Day. You need to find out what works for you. Maybe it’s like… I don’t know – Mel Gibson in that one scene from Braveheart –
Eli: Fuck Mel Gibson.
Ben: <stunned> What are you talking about? That movie is badass.
Eli: I never saw it. But Mel Gibson is a total dick. Now I could do something maybe with – I don’t know – who’s the polar opposite of Mel Gibson then?
Ben: I got it! That guy from A Quiet Place
Eli: That guy is a total Mel Gibson. No, someone else. Oooh – I know! That guy from 30 rock, the guy who plays Jack.
Ben: Alec Baldwin?
Eli: Yeah. He’s totally the anti Mel Gibson.
Ben: That is crazy. Alec Baldwin doesn’t work. I don’t think Mel Gibson has an exact opposite.
Toxic Masculinity, Testosterone, and Evolutionary Biology
Ben: OK, so this book I’m reading right now is totally blowing my mind… <blah blah blah>
Eli: So you’re saying that women are basically keeping everything from turning to shit, and that gay men have higher levels of testosterone than straight married men?
Ben: Yes to the first thing. 2nd thing needs further study.

Zoom WOD 6
Sixth installment of the semi-regular workout of the day over Zoom with my coworker Eli. Overall, I shaved 8 total seconds off the combined times of all 3 runs. Eli was able to set a PR with his 2nd and 3rd circuits, and says that his running mechanics have noticeably improved since we first started.
The cat is getting wise to my ninja entries, so this time, I snuck in through the tv room.
Sets and reps

Zoom WOD 5
The 5th installment of the scheduled Zoom WOD (workout of the day) I do with my coworker Eli. I had to skip #4 earlier this week because of a meeting conflict, but my partner went ahead without me.
Standard breaching drill to keep the cat in a heightened state of combat-readiness.
Pics from the Workout
During today’s workout, we stuck with 3 circuits, but added a few reps per exercise. The run around the block remained the same.
Zoom WOD Sets and reps
Also…
Today happens to be the first day of 8th grade in-person classes for many schools in New York City, including my daughter’s school in Chelsea. Traffic was about normal, but there was a Yeshiva school bus on Myrtle Avenue that slowed us down by five minutes on our way to the Manhattan Bridge. We arrived at the school around 8:20, and I gave her a metro card and $20 (just in case). Her twin sister attended her first in-person class of the year yesterday – without any complications.
I looked out of the windshield, and noticed a line of kids. My daughter looked up from her phone, and told me that the president just announced that he and his wife have tested positive for the corona virus.

Zoom WOD 3
On Friday, September 19, a coworker and I met up for the third installment of a scheduled Zoom workout – and it was AWESOME!! We did 3 circuits of the following exercises done with no rest in between:
40 jumping jacks
30 crunches
20 pushups (or kettlebell swings)
10 kettlebell swings (or pushups)
5 chinups (or rows)
Run around the block (~ .4 miles)

Corona Virus Dispatch from NYC, Day 148
5 mile run with Charlotte
We left the house around 11:30 am toward Fort Greene. The plan was to meet Norene and Maya at Timeout Market in Dumbo – about 5 miles from our starting point – and to get there in about an hour. This would be her first continuous run > 4 miles.
dumbo @3.75 miles
At 3.75 miles, our pace was still nice and easy. The weather was still in the 70’s, and the humidity wasn’t overbearing. Charlotte’s running form is great – good posture, running economy, and her breathing is never labored. She’s a natural athlete who routinely outperforms all of her male and female classmates in strength assessments; things like pushups, pullups, and situps. I never imagined she’d take to running, but apparently, she’s really good at that too.
5.01 miles
We finished our run by going about a half mile into Brooklyn Bridge Park, just short of the roller rink, then coming back the way we came toward Dumbo again. We did about 4 fast running segments where we probably hit 7:00 miles for about 30-45 seconds.
Timeout market
It was a fantastic morning run, and one that I hope we’ll get a chance to repeat. We regularly run in the neighborhood, but I can definitely see that Charlotte is ready to go on some longer distance runs – especially as the weather cools.

Corona Virus Dispatch from NYC, Day 145
For Joe Biden and Puerto Rico
Not feeling great. Really bombed my morning run, and wound up feeling over heated the entire day. I was going to bail on the pullup challenge, but realized I was just grouchy because of the weather. My daughters cheered me up, so I went outside and did my pullups.

Corona Virus Dispatch from NYC, Day 139
Backyard pullup challenge Week 2
139 days since the official start of New York City's covid-19 lockdown. Unlike a lot of people, I have access to a Crossfit Rig in my back yard. About a week ago, I started making it a point to track some of my foundational strength benchmarks – rope climbing, muscle-ups, and pullups. The last 2 were for the orphans and BLM.

Corona Virus Dispatch from NYC, Day 21: 3.5 hour Grocery Store Line
Sunday morning, we spent 5 hours getting groceries at the Park Slope food coop. It was totally worth it!
Minute-by-minute Recap
The view from nearly the top of 7th Avenue and President Street. About 1/3 of the line is visible here.
10:09 am - Norene enters the line of people roughly at the corner of 6th Avenue and President Street
11:10 am - I go for a 1 mile walk, then return to Norene’s position. I see various people up ahead of me in line who are doing calisthenics: jumping jacks, lunges, pullups on construction scaffolding
11:40 am - I get a large cup of black coffee at the bagel place on 7th Avenue between President and Union, then return to Norene’s spot
12:16 pm - We have moved about 1 full block, and reach 7th Avenue and President Street
12:43 pm - We reach 7th Avenue and Union
1:10 pm - We are standing 50 feet away from the coop, in front of 800 Union
1:40 pm - We receive our safety briefing about social distancing inside the coop, and then both enter
2:00 pm - I buy 7 bottles of water, 2 bars of Mast Brothers Chocolate, and 5 plain bagels, then get the f*** out of there. I do this so that Norene doesn’t have to fuss with the heavy bottles of water. Then I make a few phone calls, and wait for Norene to text me.
3:00 pm - I pick up Norene in front of the coop. We head back home in our car. As we head down a quiet side street in Prospect Heights, Norene instructs me to honk the horn at anyone who lingers in front of a green light for longer than 2 seconds. I half-heartedly comply. I’m in a totally calm mood. What else would we do on a Sunday? We got to spend time with eachother, and buy FOOD. That is a win.

Corona Virus Dispatch from NYC, Day 14: Gratitude
Being Grateful means not complaining about long waits just to shop at a fully stocked grocery store
On Sunday, the line of people waiting at the food coop was nearly 1/3 of a mile long. If it weren’t raining, it would have been longer.
On Sunday, March 29 Norene and I went to the Park Slope food coop for our weekly grocery run to pick up some staples: oatmeal, eggs, tofu, chicken, rice, bread, that kind of stuff.
The line of people waiting to Get Food was 1/3 of a mile long
It stretched from the entrance at 782 Union, all the way up to 7th Avenue, down to 7th Avenue and President Street, then half way down President, toward 6th Avenue — in total, about a third of a mile long. I joined the line at 794 President Street (marked on the map above), while Norene parked the car. The temperature was 46º, and a very light rain was coming down. I stood behind a guy who clearly had just returned from a run or a workout of some sort. He was wearing shorts and a tank top, but had a running backpack with a technical hoodie balled up inside. After an hour and fifty minutes of standing, stretching, shuffling a few feet at a time, we made it to the top of the line.
The Default Configuration
“When you’re suffering, that’s when you’re most real.” — The man in black
I don’t think being grateful is one of the default configurations of Homo Sapiens Sapiens. It has to be activated somehow — compelled. Some people are compelled more intensely, and with greater frequency than others: refugees, combat veterans, cancer survivors.
Those of us who habitually experience low levels of suffering meander through life with the default configuration, getting by with a game plan that takes us from point a to point b along a path of least resistance; using a moral and ethical calculus that prizes comfort and stability, while avoiding risk and speculative position-taking. I’m not judging by the way. I really believe this approach reflects a sound strategy of lowest up-front energy investment for largest ROI, and is surely a reasonable default. But occasionally, people in this category (habitual non-sufferers) bang up against a moment of real suffering — and not of the lowercase ‘s’ variety such as getting stuck with the middle seat on a flight from JFK to LAX. I’m talking about discovering that the plane is about to go down, or that your daughter has just been shot, or that your family’s apartment building is about to receive incoming artillery. When such a moment comes, it can induce lasting change in the form of an increased capacity for gratitude. Before that happens though, there is usually a lot of frantic metaphysical wheeling and dealing involving:
Prayers
Expressions of remorse
Promises to turn over a new leaf
The suffering in New York City is real — but not equally felt throughout the city
Sometimes, the “news reports” give the impression that we’re all living in shattered ruins, bodies just piling up everywhere. That’s not happening. Not all of us are experiencing the “crisis” with the same degree of alarm. The way I see it, a New Yorker’s opinion of how bad things are are almost entirely determined by these factors:
Your understanding of the reality inside the hospitals — my wife works as an OBGYN in a large hospital in lower Manhattan
Your personal sense of displacement and the quality of your current set of options — our options are good. We’re not kite-surfing in the Hamptons, but we’re comfortable
My family is doing well, but we are extremely concerned
Having a wife working on the front lines in the emergency room sort of puts my mind at ease, only because I trust her reports of how good or bad things really are. When I speak with my mom on the phone, I remind her of how good we have it.
My wife is a doctor, is in very good health, and has ALWAYS been a neat freak obsessively killing germs, wiping down keyboards, phones, and tablets
I am gainfully employed, in very good health, and really good at the internet
We have food, cooking gas, heat, electricity, running water, and a big back yard
There’s enough room inside the house for all of us to spread out, and not feel like we’re on top of each other
We have a car (which we drive ~ 10 miles a week)
My daughters don’t complain, and are excellent students. Their schools generally are doing a good job

Corona Virus Dispatch from NYC, Day 11: The Occasional Need for Futile and Stupid Gestures
If you occasionally go balls-to-the-wall full re*ard in situations, on the simple grounds of staunching the flow of rampant douchebaggery — this is OK. It is proof that you’re one of the good ones who carry the fire.
Ukrainian Village, Chicago 1997
I had just been dumped by my twenty two year old fiancee. At the time, we lived in a new construction three bedroom apartment in the Ukrainian Village on a stretch of West Walton Street between Ashland and Noble — less than a mile away from Nelson Algren’s old house. Our place was on the 2nd floor of a 3-floor walkup equipped with an intercom system, video monitor, and paved parking lot in the back. Inside was a working fireplace, two bathrooms, and a deck. Our bedroom had one of those connected ensuite bathrooms that you see midwestern homebuyers insist on having on all the fixer-upper reality shows nowadays. There was recessed lighting on dimmer switches in every room, 8 foot high ceilings, brand new windows, stainless steel appliances, a dishwasher. It was a god damn palace to us.
After a months-long teary and pathetic break up involving me moving out of the apartment, followed up by me later barging into the apartment at 2am secret-squirrel-style only to find her cheating on me with someone named Peter, followed by lots of alcohol-fueled gestures of despair (on my part), followed by not-too-discrete queries from concerned mutual friends asking if an intervention might be needed, the following true events unfolded.
I agreed to meet her at our apartment to collect the last of my things: a frying pan, a colander, a few books, some art supplies, and a bunch of vhs tapes of South Park episodes. We took Tank and Beana out for a walk along the alley in the back and around the block. Along the way, we spoke to each other calmly, each trying to act more aloof than the other, recapping in a very business-like manner all of the small details of how to work out the apartment rent for the remainder of the lease, what to do with large furniture - stuff like that. Things were looking OK. When we were coming back toward the alley, I sort of off the cuff repeated a claim I enjoyed making.
“I can run faster than 75% of all dogs”
Let me clarify: 75% of all dogs at your average city park in Chicago (randomly selected of course) — without question, no doubt in my fucking mind — three quarters — I would smoke them in a 100 yard race. Maybe not 50 yards, but definitely 100 yards. She exhaled a bit when I said this, and came very close to groaning. Previously, when we were a couple, she would find this funny. She would laugh and explain to our friends that I was always saying crazy shit like that. On that day, she was having none of it.
“You know, Beana is really fast. Tank is still a puppy, but I don’t think you could run faster than a Rat Terrier.”
After a brief pause…
“You know what, let’s just head back.” she said, snorting a bit and chuckling.
There was something a little different in her voice when she said this. Something that went a little bit past mere doubt, and ventured into the territory of derision, mockery even. I sensed that she was lacing up her testicle stomping cleats, so I pulled at Tank’s leash, and came to a stop.
“I would fucking bet you I can run faster than Beana.”
She didn’t say anything; just let out a sigh, and kept walking down the alley.
“Hey! I’m fucking serious ******. I will show you right here in this alley. Right fucking now.”
This managed to get her attention. She stopped and turned around to look at me. This time, her popsicle eyes full-on blasting me with frosty thunderbolts of fuck you. I don’t really remember the details of how I got her to agree, but we laid out some ground rules for a race.
The Ground Rules
Tank would be leashed to a dumpster
The three of us would start at the dumpster — Beana, my ex (aka: *******), and me
My ex would run in front of Beana, get her all riled up and excited to run down the alley
As soon as Beana got 10-20 yards out, I would take that as my cue to start
We would stop where my car was parked - a little bit more than 100 meters down the alley, maybe as much as 200 meters
“Are you sure you want to do this”? she asked.
Enter Beana: MTV Dog from the Real World with an Owner named Chris
Beana was a Rat Terrier my ex had agreed to dog sit for my friend — let’s call him “Chris”. Chris and I were not friends in the sense that Dothraki horsemen are “friends”. We were more like, “hey, can you spot me $20 until tomorrow” kind of friends. We worked at the same restaurant, drank heavily, and smoked a lot of cigarettes. Chris listened to Social Distortion, and liked to wear dark denim jeans and short sleeve plaid shirts. He had tats along both his arms, and a few that crawled up his neck. He liked to think of himself as a taller, rock-a-billy version of James Dean. He was, more accurately, a tall unathletic white guy with crooked teeth who coughed a lot. However… the most interesting thing about Chris: his dog Beana just kind of wandered onto the set of MTV’s Real World (the dog that Puck found), and momentarily became a fixture of at least 1 episode.
In the show, the “friends” agreed that they would have to return the dog to its rightful owner. This somehow happens, and a little later, my friend Chris is contacted by the show producers, and instructed to show up to the loft to collect his dog. On camera. He actually appeared on the show for about 30 seconds. That little unscripted wrinkle made Puck and the other roommates very sad. It was emotional. But they struggled, got over it, and managed to carry on. After Chris was reunited with Beana, he moved to Chicago and became a line cook at an upscale Asian Fusion restaurant on Randolph Street called R** L**** — which is where I worked as a waiter.
Chris was an adequate cook, but when it came to devising ways of steering any old conversation to that MTV appearance, he was like a Delta Force sniper. The dude had some lady-grifting skills too, despite his overall ashtray-like qualities. He once told me about this trick that he claimed worked on 75% of all girls he convinced to come back to his apartment. He’d stage his coffee table with a copy of Love in the Time of Cholera, face down, opened up to a spot somewhere in the first few chapters. He even underlined a few passages. The guy really thought things through. Chicks would see that book, and immediately arrive at a completely wrong assessment of Chris — which was exactly the intended result.
The Race
I began thinking that this might in fact, be the last time that my ex and I would speak to each other. My last opportunity to leave some kind of impression. I cast that thought aside, and focused instead on my future anterior self. Of how, if that version of me could reach back into time — into the right now — and advise me on whether or not to race this dog, or just walk away, what would that person want me to do? I even pictured some good looking biracial kids nestled up next to me, asking… “Hey dad, can you tell me the story of how you raced the dog in the alley?” And that is what clinched it for me. I snapped back to my present moment.
“I’m ready.”
******* took off with Beana — at a clumsy trot at first, but then picked up some speed. After 15 feet or so, she unhooked Beana from the lash so that she could accelerate on her own. Watching that little dog shoot down the alley was like seeing a cartoon balloon zip around after the air is released.
“Go Beana! Go!!” she screamed, both fists clenched by her sides. Fucking exclamation points were streaming out of her orbital sockets.
It occurred to me that my ex had quite possibly, infused an inordinate amount of symbolism into the outcome of this race: wanting me to fail more than actually wanting Beana to win. I quickly acknowledged that the two of us were terrible together. I bit down and wriggled my lower jaw around a bit to gird myself for a possible hernia. There was no fucking way in hell I was going to lose this race.
As soon as Beana got to the agreed-upon head start marker, I took off. My initial acceleration to that spot was agonizingly slow, but after realizing that my longer strides put me at a huge advantage, I became confident I would catch up. And I did — very quickly. What worried me was that maybe I had underestimated how much faster Beana would run once I caught up to her. So I toyed around with her for a bit, playfully calling her name, then exploded forward for the last half of the race as soon as I thought I could sneak it in. I looked back maybe once, and saw that Beana was far behind me; perhaps, had even stopped, I wasn’t sure. When I reached my car, I threw my hands up in the air to celebrate my victory.
When I turned to look down the alley in the direction of my ex, I could see she was mad. She was pulling at Tank, glancing from side to side,  stomping on imaginary objects, ready to eject ballistics from her sphincter. The alley was quiet and completely empty — as if this silly race were intended from the get-go by the powers that be, to be a private affair. I wanted to say something witty, something cold. Maybe just something short and snarky like I told you so you bitch! — but decided against it. I put my colander, and miscellaneous objects in the back seat of my car, then left the parking lot at a low speed. When I turned right on Ashland, I rolled down the window, and thought of how I would recount this story to my future kids.

Corona Virus Dispatch from NYC, Day 10: Scary Movies as Barometers
We are not quite here (yet).
As I was slacking with @alluma
It occurs to me as I chat with a London-based coworker of mine over Slack, that New York City is rapidly transforming into a movie set.  Back in 2004 when I lived on the lower east side, I went for a run along the east river one weekend, and stopped cold as soon as I saw a dozen or so Humvees and hundreds of soldiers. Turns out, the whole thing was part of a film set for a new Will Smith movie about the end of the world. If you’re thinking of watching it, I concur with the Rotten Tomatoes score of ~ 68%.
So back to Covid-19… nowadays, on any given week day, all of New York f***ing city basically looks like it is being staged for a film shoot. The entire status of the city can thus, be summarized by  a movie title — much like those idiotic color-coded terror alerts that Tom Ridge and Dick Cheney loved right after 9/11. Perhaps, if we all agreed to use this movie-inspired scheme, we could successfully communicate the sense of urgency to the rest of the fucking country, who are apparently receiving dipshit lessons from the residents of Florida and Kentucky. Below is my proposal:
Children of Men: we are currently here
Contagion
I am Legend
28 Days Later
Mad Max: Fury Road

Corona Virus Dispatch from NYC, Day 9: Aqua Best
Aqua Best - a fish store on Manhattan’s lower east side owned by a family friend.
I decide to drive into the city on Tuesday around 5pm — almost on a whim. I head over the Manhattan bridge, take a right on Grand after passing the playground on Chrystie. All up and down Chrystie Street and Forsyth - and even along Grand - there are parking spots all over the place. Plastic bags and scraps of paper dart through the air, held up by wind that is unencumbered. On a normal Tuesday, those bags would be trampled down, kicked aside, swept away, somehow kept in check by one of several possible factors: delivery trucks, fire engines, cop cars, people exiting or entering cars, cabbies pulling into the cab stand, bus drivers, pedestrians, little old ladies with laundry baskets, bikers, men on trikes loaded up with tools, well dressed women pushing a $1,500 heavy duty stroller. Today, all such factors are gone. The litter is free to blow around at knee level and higher; occasionally slapping against your pants, or even drifting up to eye level, forcing you to duck or swat like a dumb ass tourist. Of the people who do walk around, three quarters wear face masks. A few actually have the proper N-95 respirators, but most of the masks I see look like they’re made out of the same paper-thin gauzy material as the disposable pajamas you are given when you get an MRI.
I park on Grand, directly across from Aqua Best, shut off the engine, and for a moment consider putting money in the meter. I push the hazard lights on instead, open my door, and tell my daughters to stay close to me — don’t go in the store with me, keep your distance from people. I speak in a calm but terse military manner. When I walk in, there are 2 employees: a young guy, thirty five maybe, at the register wearing surgical gloves, no mask; the other, a tall Chinese grampa type wearing a gauzy white face mask, hands clasped behind his back. Many of the bins are covered, but up front I see a few baskets of blue crabs, some whole fish (red snapper and cat fish), a few sting rays, and a bus tub of razor clams. There are also 2 large tanks of lobsters.
“Hey, is Freeman around?” I asked both of them.
“He’s not feeling well. Stayed at home today.”
Freeman is the owner of Aqua Best. Well, more accurately, his family has owned the place for two generations, and he and his siblings run it. A year earlier, Freeman branched out on his own with a high-end seafood restaurant and raw bar called Essex Pearl. It’s located on the lower floor of a glitzy new commercial development, surrounded by high rise condos with million dollar studio apartments, and half a block away from the soon-to-launch Low Line - the East Side’s answer to the High Line. Rent is fucking astronomical.
Having grown up in Chinatown, especially in an entrepreneurial Chinese family running a successful fish business, let me just say that Freeman is not walking around with his head shoved up his ass. He knows how to hustle and get shit done; knows the value of hard work, and treating people with respect. He went to school with my wife at the Catholic elementary school, down the street from the Knickerbocker. Our daughters have attended the same  schools since kindergarten: first in Little Italy, later in Chelsea.
I felt bad for him now, because I know what kind of dough is required to keep a place like Essex Pearl open - the monthly rent alone will set you back more than a Tesla. I wanted to spend a lot of money at his store, but didn’t really see much of anything I wanted. To be honest, I was starting to have second thoughts about even coming into Manhattan. The sight of empty streets and the mask-wearing people ducking and weaving through litter was making me very self conscious. I decided on 2 dozen littleneck clams and half a dozen scallops. I placed $25 on the counter, received my change, and drove back to Brooklyn across the Manhattan Bridge.

Corona Virus Dispatch from NYC, Day 8: A Metamorphosis of Concern
As an adult, I’m convinced that the only thing that forces the average person to become philosophically contemplative (a la Martin Heidegger) is a serious (and disturbing) confrontation with the possibility of dying.
When I was 18 years old, I was stationed at Fort Leonard Wood, Missouri, and wrapping up my training as a Combat Engineer. Because of what was going on in Kuwait at the time, and the strong belief that Saddam Hussein’s army possessed chemical and biological weapons, everyone believed the constant stream of CNN ballpark estimates of first day casualties, which hovered around 40,000. That was the consensus in the summer of 1990, and that’s what pushed me as an adult to begin subjecting my life to closer examination.
Martin Heidegger, author of Being and Time, philosophical Nazi, lover of semi-colons and hyphenated-words.
The emergence of Joe “6-pack” Dasein
The Corona Virus outbreak, for many Americans, is the first time that large numbers of people will acknowledge that nearly 100% of what they think about, worry about, and concern themselves with is nonessential. And they didn’t even have to read Being and Time!
Not wanting to be a negative Nancy, and certainly not being too cool for frivolous concerns myself, I wanted to put together a list of my own silly-as-f*** preoccupations and frivolous diversions. Luckily, all I had to do was search through Evernote using the phrase preoccupation.
Cataloging My Preoccupations
Since 2006, I have jotted down interesting things in Evernote that I felt might one day be useful to know or interesting to discuss with my daughters. Things such as book lists, odd jobs I have had, places to visit, beautiful college libraries, etc. This diversion grew into a project of general list-making that encompassed any old thought/idea that just kind of stuck; that I couldn’t shake for whatever reason. Below are a few examples:
Ideas for inventions that could never possibly be made (ie: Aerosol-delivered burrito sealant)
Super powers of comic book heroes/villains, which with the benefit of hindsight and maturity, now appear patently absurd (ie: Buford Hollis aka: Razorback - “…Razorback is a skilled mechanic and self-taught engineer who built two cab-over tractor-trailer trucks with sophisticated defensive systems, enhanced engines and self-drive capabilities”. I am not making this shit up.)
Phrases that nearly (but do not exactly) rhyme (ie: can I have a glass of chateau-neuf-du-pape? … can I ask you to shut-the-fuck-up?)
News headlines that look made up, but are not (ie: My baby was born without an anus or… 9 Struggles Only People Who Love To Wear Hats Would Understand)
Wondrous sounding names of beings, places, and objects taken from folklore, etc. (ie: Kusanagi - sometimes called The Sword of the gathering clouds of heaven)
One such list I find very instructive is a recurring one titled: Things I am preoccupied with. This list, much like the Dow Jones Industrial Average, behaves as a basic barometer — a timestamped indicator of the degree to which my own head is shoved up my own ass. Below is a comparison of two lists: one collected today; the other from a time that is pre-covid 19.
Things I am concerned with now -  3/23/2020
Getting food
Keeping my family virus-free
My wife or children being assaulted because of racists that have been triggered by the words of the man-child President *****
Rioting, looting - the establishment of martial law
The possibility of a major step toward the dismantling of American democracy such as the “temporary” dissolution of Congress
My daughters becoming inculcated into a slave-like obedience to screens and online meetings; of equating education with contract work
The safety of my sister’s family and my parents
Things I was (at an earlier point) concerned with - 4/20/2018
There is never enough fucking coffee in the house
My new hair-do keeps changing shape from a mohawk to a Peeky Blinders style comb-over, depending on wind conditions, and it sort of bothers me
My boss is not telling me the truth about something
The house numbers Norene bought are so f***ing dark, they may as well be invisible
My daughter sort of f***ed up on her Revolutionary War report, and I'll have to talk to her about it
My daughters just don’t know how proud I am of them
I think my dad is lonely
I'm worried about my mom's health
I worry that **** ***** is going to leave our jiu jitsu school
There is so much junk mail arriving at our house, it's f***ing insane
We just got a $***** tax refund, and I'm worried that an IRS klaxon has gone off in Washington DC
The f***ing squirrels are back to their dumb ways in the yard again
My trip to Detroit is coming up, and I really want it to go well
I'm still on chapter 1 of the book on machine learning I'm reading. There just haven't been enough opportunities for quiet uninterrupted time
My randori pacing during jiu jitsu is just fine, but **** thought I was punishing a blue belt last week - I completely disagree with that characterization
The basement in the house is still creepy as f***
The garden hose in the back has lost 10-20% of its water pressure - for reasons I have yet to discover
The Japanese coffee place, Anchor, is flagrantly overcharging for drip coffee, and those f***ers are getting away with it — Brown Butter on Tompkins is even worse
I have a TON of hobbies that I'd like to pursue, but no time to do them all - Japanese wood block printing for instance. Shit man, time is not infinite!
I'd like to have a barbecue and see some old friends
When and where will our next vacation be?
When in the s*** is POTUS going to be ejected from office?
Midterm elections. Let there be an avalanche. F***ing please.
Ted F***ing Cruz is an invertebrate
My bottom teeth really need to be straightened out
I am worried that my 10K and half marathon race times have really suffered in the last year
I need to quit my Chelsea Piers membership, but the quality of close-by gyms in Brooklyn is abysmal
I worry that there is a brain drain going on at work
When in the world is spring really going to begin? The f***ing outside temperature on April 20 is only slightly above freezing (37º)
There is so much ignorance in the world, and the social cost of it is growing as the global population increases
The chasm between credulous low-information people and skeptical people who can think critically is enormous. There is a f***ing man who commissioned a low earth orbit rocket to be built so that he could pilot it in order to prove that the earth is flat. He is a former limousine driver and very competent auto mechanic. ‽ #Buford_Hollis
There has never once, in the history of the world, been a WYSIWYG editor that is not a total f***ing piece of shit. Can we not just assemble an international consortium of the greatest minds on earth to solve this problem once and for all?!

Corona Virus Dispatch from NYC, Day 7: Online School
Since Wed. 3/18/2020, my daughters have done classwork over Zoom from our parlor floor table.
School has been out for a full week - since Monday, March 16. To be honest, I decided on Friday afternoon to keep my kids home regardless of any official announcement. As many New Yorkers may remember, Friday the 13th was the pivotal turning point for the mayor and for the DOE because that was when Healthcare Workers union 1199 SEIU joined forces with parents and the United Federation of Teachers, and officially endorsed the view that closing all NYC public schools was a responsible public health move. It wasn’t until Sunday night that the mayor made it official.
How Hunter Did Things
I have a 7th grade daughter at Hunter who has been in Zoom classes since Wednesday, March 18. Her twin sister, who attends school at LAB starts on Monday. Overall, I have been deeply impressed with Hunter.
Communication was in small doses, and easy to understand
Each of the half dozen or so emails sent by the principal and his staff leading up to the start date were concise and well-explained - giving the vibe of “don’t worry, we’ll let you know exactly what to do before we spring it on you, and it won’t be super complicated”.
They decided on a single platform: Zoom
Unlike some schools, Hunter chose to standardize all instruction on a single platform. About a week before DOE’s decision to suspend school, Hunter announced that they would be using Zoom as their online instructional platform. Teachers went to a two day intensive instructional bootcamp, and the administration requested all parents to fill out an online technical survey, asking questions like..
Do you have high speed internet at your home?
Does your student have access to a computer with a camera?
Can the student download software on the computer?
Expectations were clearly stated before classes began
Each student received an online itinerary with class names and unique Zoom meeting id links that very closely followed their regular class schedule. There was a “soft launch” on Wednesday that only included 2 or 3 classes. On that day, the expectations were kept low, and it was really just a chance for teachers and students to login for the first time as a group and confirm that everyone could see each other, speak and listen - and just sort of take the whole system for a test drive. The next day, Thursday, Zoom classroom instruction officially commenced. Even PE class was conducted over Zoom. The teacher even sent instructions for all the students to be in front of their cameras in uniform.
Overall, Hunter did an excellent job
Their clear communication, decision to standardize on Zoom, and soft-launch really went a long way in ensuring a smooth rollout with shockingly few technical glitches.
Some things they could improve
Frequency of zoom meetings may be excessive - students are in front of screens for an extremely long portion of the day, and I’m concerned about the long-term effects of enormous amounts of screen time
There has not been sufficient relaxation of expectations to adjust for the huge uptick in environmental stress
Parting Thoughts & Observations
I cannot believe how resilient my daughters have been through this. They’re each dealing with things in their own way. One of them plays with her cat endlessly, watches scary movies, and absolutely loves the fact that she doesn’t have to go outside. The other one misses her friends terribly, and has been catching up on reading for pleasure, and doing artwork. My wife, perhaps because she’s in the thick of things at an emergency room in lower Manhattan, is keeping up with the latest developments nonstop: new screening and triage protocols, advancements in testing, how many masks are being used/day, new ways of filling out patient charts, etc.
Each day, I think of how fortunate we all are to have a roof over our heads, a warm house, a fully stocked refrigerator, and two healthy parents. As a family, we talk about the news quite a lot; about what’s going on in northern Italy and South Korea, about the response from Governor Cuomo, Mayor De Blasio, and President *****. We play Jenga, watch netflix, and exercise in our back yard. I call my mom and dad (a lot), and crack jokes about how the pandemic has revealed to anyone with common sense the degree to which our diversions are so non-essential. Things like: Instagram, Facebook, Tik Tok, $800 3d-printed reproductions of your pet, pretty much anything that comes out of the mouth of a celebrity, the tweets of President *****.
We’re living through a catastrophe that is unfolding at a rate roughly a million times faster than climate change, and still, people are too stupid and willful to make small adjustments to their behavior for the public good, and ultimately their best interests.
I try and do my best to come up with a positive spin on things, while strictly adhering to a no bullshit approach with my daughters. It’s been hard, but I look to the incredibly brave people of Italy and South Korea for inspiration.

How Not to Prepare for a 5K
I remember a race I did back in April of 2017 - the Backbones 5K - held in Prospect Heights, IL. At the time, I was still in the early stages of figuring out my running routine; still doing a lot of reading and experimentation; not quite comfortable with the idea of thinking of myself as a runner. I had no particular tie to that race’s organizers or pet cause - I really just wanted to get in some quality running while visiting my mom.
Let me briefly summarize my mother
She was born in 1951 in Pusan/Busan, South Korea. For anyone not in the know, the Korean War was in full swing by the time my mom was born. Also, my maternal grandmother was nursing a terminally ill husband and a three year old son, and couldn’t breast feed because of complications with her own health. It was a total shit situation, which left my mom in the predicament of spending the first few years of her life in a 24/7 knife-fight with death by way of starvation. Because of the war, most things that people really needed - like baby formula, rice, medicine - were not what you’d call easy to come by. So my grandmother fed my mom the glutinous runoff slurry from boiling rice to give her something, anything - just to keep her alive, hoping that if she didn’t die, it would toughen her up. My mom survived, but had a hard time walking until she was three years old.  For the next 12 years of her life, she became a world class Macgyver at figuring out how to put food in her belly without getting sick, robbed, beaten up, stabbed, raped or murdered - in that order. He entire philosophy of food - what to eat, how long it can be left out before it goes bad, how fast you should eat, how much you should store, how much you should hide, etc. is based upon those years.
The night before my race
I made the mistake of showing up to my mom's apartment hungry - right around 7:00pm. She had several pounds of hormone-injected cow meat ready for me, along with a large bowl of white rice and some salad. I ate about 2-3 pounds of cow, several bowls of rice, and then went to sleep without having taken a dump.
The morning of the race
Tundro, launching explosive ordnance from his horn ~ 1967
At 6am, I woke up, went to the bathroom, and forced something the size of a small meatball out of my ass at high speed. It felt like passing a little meteorite, which reminded me of Tundro, one of the Herculoids, from the old Hannah Barbera cartoon. Tundro was a triceratops-like-creature, who could shoot glowing explosive projectiles out of a tumescent forehead appendage that invoked a rhino horn, an elephant snout, and a dildo (simultaneously).
After I flushed down the meatball, I ate a quick breakfast. Some people think this is a big mistake. For me, running at high intensity on an empty stomach in the morning - even for extremely short distances like 3 miles - causes my performance to drop off a cliff. So for a couple years, I stuck to a simple routine of eating about a quarter or an eighth of a meal a few hours before a race to prevent this from happening. My mom had already been up for at least half an hour, and had prepared a half pot of coffee, two fried eggs and two semi-burnt Jewel Osco sesame seed bagels. I wolfed down one of the eggs, a half bagel with a splash of hot sauce, and a cup of black coffee.
Let me now share a theory with no basis in science to explore why I’m so skittish about running while hungry. When you are the child of a person who has been malnourished for most or all of their childhood, it doesn’t matter if you were born in a state of the art hospital (I was not). Somewhere, deep down on a molecular level, the memory of that hunger lives in you. You walk around with the ghosts of that food trauma your entire life, and as a result, all of your small and large judgements concerning food will pass through the prism of that other person’s suffering. As a young boy, and later a man, I have always eaten fast. I never stopped to question why - just accepted it as a de facto truth. In the army, people were astonished that my natural speed of eating blew right past the expectations of drill sergeants. My buddies hated ordering pizza with me because they all knew I could easily finish an entire pizza myself before any of them could finish 2 pieces. I attribute that outlier behavior to my mother’s experiences.
Pre-Race Prep
I dressed in shorts, running tights, a t-shirt, a thermal top layer, and a rain layer. I also wore a hat - the black weather proof one I got from the Richmond Anthem half marathon last November. By 7, we were headed downstairs, out to the parking lot, and into my rental car - a white compact SUV with hardened plastic insides and paper-thin upholstered seats. We drove one mile away to the Dunkin Donuts on Wagner Road where I ordered a large black Dunkin Donuts coffee, along with a 16 ounce bottle of Fiji water. My mom and I sat down for 15 minutes or so, then drove to the race start, which was only a couple miles away.
After I parked, we sat in the car. I tilted my seat back and mentally rehearsed my mile splits, occasionally dishing out some level one chit chat with my mom. She sat in the passenger side seat,  looking forward, with her purse on her lap. She spoke slowly, thoughtfully. Like she was determined not to make any pronunciation or grammar mistakes.
“How do you feel? Do you think you’ll do well today?”
“I’m good. I just want to get in some training miles while I’m here.”
“Good, good - do you think you’ll know anybody there?”
“I don’t think so.” but I thought about this, and amended my answer: “Maybe. Probably not anyone from high school, but maybe someone from college.”

Rain
The evening before the race, I noticed the rain was not letting up. In fact, I had received an email from the race organizers a few days earlier, indicating that they might need to cancel out of safety concerns. As it turned out, the rain halted to a light on-and-off drizzle.
The Course
We started the first leg of the race down what seemed like the service road of a major highway. I was behind the same guy from the time the gun went off, until about mile one. I realized he was probably not pacing himself properly, and based on my confidence that I was indeed holding back for the first mile, I passed him as soon as mile two began. I later learned that that guy’s name was Mike Burns, and that he's a retired 61 year old fire fighter.
AFTER THE RACE
I had dinner with my mom at Martin's family's restaurant in Harwood Heights. It was a meal of fajitas and tacos with a non-alcoholic beer. Afterwards, Martin and I split off to head to a place called Curragh's, located in the newly remodeled Glenview Naval Air Station. We stayed up until 2am. I went to bed absolutely exhausted.
WHAT I LEARNED
Quality REST before a race is important
Running 5K's well is something you really need to train for. Specifically. My endurance has improved, but my speed has gone to s***. Developing endurance and speed are actually 2 different training objectives. If you have speed, and don’t polish it, you’ll lose it. Same goes with endurance.
Be scientific about pre-race nutrition, don’t wing it, and don’t ever deviate from a proven regimen. Oh yeah, and certainly do not leave it in the hands of a person who spent their childhood in alternating intensities of malnourishment. For me, my best races involve…
1 cup (or less) of black coffee
1/2 bagel or 1/4 cup of oatmeal + 1/2 egg eaten 2 hours in advance
8oz or less of water (you better hydrate the night before!)
Resist the urge to go fast right out of the gate. Several people who bolted ahead of me during the first mile wound up finishing several minutes after me - and this is not an aberration from the norm. First-time racers and children do this all the time
Quality REST after a race is THE MOST important

3 Pencil Sharpeners You Must Own
I own several pencils and pencil sharpeners. This video shows three of my favorite low-budget sharpeners - for people who enjoy putting a good point on their pencil tips.

The Every-day-if-ication of $7 Coffee
On June 23, 2016, I came to the sad realization that most living, breathing American coffee drinkers in New York City don't understand what the f*** a coffee refill is; do not understand what it's premised on; do not see the need, do not see the business rationale, do not comprehend the implicit social covenant that the concept stems from -- cannot manage to wrap their thoughts around the idea of a theoretically bottomless cup of coffee. I know that June 23 was the date because I wrote it down. When I did, I recalled a much earlier incident in July 2006, which is when I first became aware of the rank ignorance around the topic of coffee refills, at least here in New York City. Let me try to explain how the decline of coffee refills is connected to gentrification, and something I call artisanal everything.
People Who Love Coffee Refills
If you are like me, and are outraged by even the possibility of the decline of the coffee refill, I would venture a guess that you are the type of person who scores very high on this assessment. In other words, it's highly likely that one or more of the following things are true of you:
You live in or grew up in a flyover state/region
You currently or used to drive a forklift and/or address(ed) your manager as your supervisor or boss and/or use(d) a punch card to log the hours of your work
You cash(ed) a paycheck and/or commonly visit(ed) a check cashing service to conduct your affairs
You unironically think that Vin Diesel, Wesley Snipes, or Steven Seagal make great movies
Your idea of a fancy dinner out is/was Applebee's or Red Lobster or Long John Silver's
You can identify military rankings on uniforms
You are an immigrant or the child of an immigrant
Unlimited Coffee Refills Explained
Feel free to skip over this if you already know the deal. For all others, read on. Suppose you were to go into a quick-service food establishment place (commonly called a diner) with the express or implied intent of sitting down and staying. After taking a seat, an exchange like the following occurs.
"Black coffee please." you say."Sure thing, I'll be right back." comes the reply.
The employee, whose job title is (waiter | waitress | server) brings you a heavy ceramic cup filled with coffee. It sits atop a saucer, and is accompanied by a spoon. The following items are within reach:
Packets of sugar or a diner-style sugar pourer with a stainless steel lid and a trap door opening
Sweet-n-low and/or Splenda
Pre-packaged liquid creamer, or a container of half and half. If you're in a Northern European themed breakfast or brunch place that does refills ironically, you may receive actual heavy cream. This type of place doesn't count as a diner.
It may be the case that he/she also sets down an entire pitcher (!) of additional coffee on your table. If that is the case, you are likely at a Greek-owned diner with a fanciful name like the Golden Nugget. Now, suppose 10 minutes go by, and your coffee is running low - below half. In the case of the pitcher scenario, we'll say it's empty. That's when you catch the attention of the waitress, and say...
"Could I get a refill?" or... "Could you top this off?" or... "Could you give me a little more coffee?"
And the person will go away and return with a pot of coffee in hand. If you ordered decaf, the coffee pot will have an orange spout. The employee will pour additional coffee directly into your cup. In the case of the pitcher, you will also receive a fresh pitcher of coffee (I know how crazy this sounds). This process is recursive, and can repeat with no limit (theoretically). When it's time to pay, you will be charged for 1 cup of coffee. That is how it works.
How we moved away from Coffee Refills
Two mutually reinforcing factors
Gentrification - driven by real estate prices that are TOTALLY off the rails
Artisanal Everything - The leveling up of blue collar domains of expertise at the hands of the well-educated, well-off, and well-insulated beneficiaries of gentrification
1. Gentrification
First, let me say this: I love some of the effects of "gentrification": better grocery stores and restaurants, lower crime, interesting and good looking neighbors, etc. But I'm not convinced its side effects can be controlled without serious intervention, both subtle and flagrant. Here in New York City for example, consider 2 sets of homeowners on the same block in Brooklyn, who own identically sized houses.
Bob
Bob is an architect, and has a net worth of $5 million. He went to Yale, worries about climate change, drives a Tesla, and has a really badass instagram feed of great ramen joints. He paid $1 million cash for his house, then did a 1 year gut renovation of it that cost $3 million. As he was doing the renovation, he rented out a small one bedroom apartment in Dumbo for $6,000 a month.
Darryl
Darryl lives across the street from Bob. He owns his house because his grandparents bought it for $80,000 back in the 1970's. He works part time at a carwash, and makes a few extra bucks here and there doing housework for some of the older people in the neighborhood. Darryl couldn't scrape together $1,000 cash on a good day. He never went to college, rides the bus and subway, and recently had to call the cable company with a fake name to order new service because he couldn't pay for his existing service (which was shut off).
Now consider what kinds of businesses are opening up in Bob and Darryl's neighborhood. There's a restaurant serving southern cuisine with artisanally sourced produce at $25 - $40 an entree, a high-end pet food and pet toy store, a newly expanded wine store featuring an eclectic selection of reds from Eastern Europe and Portugal, a cafe that also sells flower arrangements from $25 - $175, a bakery with $7 tiramisu and $4 baguettes, a hip Japanese taco place with $27 poke bowls and tiny kale salads served in mostly recycled cups for $8. There are lots of great new places for Bob. Not so much for Darryl. Nobody is busting down the door of the bank to try and get a business loan to open a 99 cent store that sells light bulbs and cheap plastic toys for kids. Bob and Darryl nominally live in the same neighborhood, but their lived realities share no points of intersection.
2. Artisanal Everything
Certain places (like Brooklyn) have high concentrations of Bob-like people. The fact that there exists a moral conundrum of being a person of vast means while living next door to people barely scraping by is correctly recognized as an incredible business opportunity. And this state of affairs is a necessary precondition of artisanal everything. In a nutshell, the reasoning works like this...
Economies of scale & globalization have resulted in huge wealth inequality - which is bad
Long ago, way before globalization, the world was simpler and artisans made everything
Artisans, though less efficient than machines, make things slowly, skillfully, and with dedication to their craft
Things made by artisans result in higher levels of satisfaction for the buyers of such things
Artisans lack advanced education, but produce works that give life savour - like the salty people the bible mentions in Matthew 5:13
I don't want to read the bible or be an unskilled low wage worker, but I want to support artisans
Every person curates a personal narrative; a story they tell and retell (in their head), which in effect says this is who I am. It's an inescapable compulsory feature of being a storytelling animal. A central dilemma of Bob's narrative is that he enjoys the status and power his six figure salary and stock options confer, but doesn't want to see himself as a gentrifier. And he wants Darryl to see him as a person who works hard; who relishes and savors life just as deeply as he does; as a person who happens to be fortunate enough to enjoy material success, but isn't at all eager to flaunt it. Bob believes that grandstanding your wealth is tacky. Over the course of growing up, becoming educated, and socialized by his professional reference group, Bob has shaped a philosophy of consumption that favors quality over quantity, with the bonus caveat that objects and experiences that pay homage to the pious and hardworking should be sought out precisely because these people are the polar opposite of the tacky bourgeoisie that Darryl would surely despise. This narrative is what helps drive Bob into the bosom of artisanal everything: cheese, pencils, wine, towels, ceramics, etc. His consumer choices reflect his internal desire to appropriate a sense of honesty, goodness, simplicity, and hard work for himself - virtues that college-educated Americans of the late 20th century and oughts (like Bob) associate with people possessing high levels of piety and/or low levels of education (like Darryl).
Artisanal everything is diabolically successful because it has a purifying effect on Bob's purchases, and permits him to believe he's showing empathy for and solidarity with people like Darryl - so long as he is fully committed to consuming things that reflect a simple, honest, and authentic lifestyle. That is the linchpin in the narrative of artisanal everything. Bob will go to great lengths to seek out and buy only the best most authentic artisanal objects and experiences made by the zaniest people possessing the most improbable combinations of skills. The products and services of such people act as receptacles of goodness and humility that are transferrable to Bob precisely because he has done the leg work of seeking them out and interpreting the symbolism of it all.
A real world example: The Donut
Totally lowbrow, like it was intended since day 1.
Donuts are just fried dough and sugar; a staple food for cops, teachers, firefighters, and all manner of people hailing from blue collar backgrounds. They are customarily handed to you in a greasy bag through a small drive-thru window, and are widely understood as lowbrow. They're easy to make, and cheap.
But let's suppose one day, an enterprising young chef from the French Laundry decides to take a second look at this maligned comfort food. He hires a 19 year old instagrammer to photo-chronicle a donut rediscovery "exploration" during the chef's 3 month sabbatical in Oakland while renting a $5,000 a month loft equipped with a badass industrial kitchen and amazing lighting. The place is crammed with whiteboards, chalk boards, dry erasers, post-it's, at all times kicking off a strong vibe of a Manhattan project style endeavor that is definitely not for the faint of heart. The chef plows through gigantic amounts of caffeine and tobacco. Scraps of paper litter the kitchen floor, ash trays in window sills overflow, husks of broken ball point pens (yes, real ball point pens) are flung around, a giant Hobart mixer lies tipped over, sauté pans are piled up in the sink. Every day there is a delightfully staged series of vignettes posted to the instagram feed that give us glimpses into the creative pandemonium of this wacky project. Occasionally, there are even short vines that are uploaded to entice us further by giving us more awareness of the insides of the stupendous loft.
As time goes on, the instagram photos begin to show signs of refinement. Toward the end of the sabbatical, the final reveal: pure f***ing magic that the originators of donuts could not have possibly dreamt up back in the day before sous vide, flash freezing, and anti-griddles -- made possible, we learn via twitter, with a recipe the chef gleaned while visiting his grandparents in the Czech Republic. The grandparents were circus cooks during World War II who smuggled secrets into and out of Prague for British Intelligence on the inside of donuts. Not only that, we also discover that on a hilltop just outside the city, grows an ancient varietal of wheat, planted by Franciscan monks in the 14th century who were the very first Europeans to have played a game that scholars now believe was a medieval version of kickball. The chef of course, gets permission to bring samples of the wheat back to the states, and spends a small fortune to painstakingly reproduce a 700 year old flour mill from a set of drawings that serendipitously fell into his lap while he was doing a spirit cleanse inside of a yurt at Burning Man, and well... you get the rest.
General Features of the Artisanal Parable
Here's how it works, 1-2-3 style:
Take any food item that is primarily associated with blue collar people and...
If it's ethnic, even better and...
Has not been altered in any way for decades or centuries by its blue collar originators and...
Introduce that food to someone with a formal culinary pedigree that is unimpeachable and...
Allow that person to inject their expertise on to the already-delicious blue collar food and...
Ensure that the modifications are rooted in an even more authentic version of the food that can be corroborated by a compelling story that reminds rich people of 1 or more academy award nominated movies and...
Use only the most expensive ingredients/cooking equipment and...
Convince rich people (like Bob) to interpret the new version of this food as a "best of old meets best of new" enterprise - wrapping it in the flowery artisanal language of spare no expense craftsmanship and...
Reinforce the narrative by packaging the food item or some element of the experience with flourishes like twine, a hand-written note, roughly cut paper, or a well-placed conspicuous employee who looks like he/she sleeps in a homeless shelter and...
Throttle the output of the food output, or force people to wait a long time to get it so that there is the unshakeable perception that they are being patient for a very good reason and...
Increase the price of the food item by 5000%
Examples
Cocktails prepared by people with the honorific title of mixologist who eagerly tell you the 5 minute story about the vintage ice cube machine in use at the bar
Coffee that takes several minutes to make
Ham that is sliced by a non-electric meat slicer
Bone marrow harvested from cows in Vermont
Ice Cream made by Brooklynites with masters degrees in fine arts
How this killed the Coffee Refill
Places like Manhattan, Brooklyn, Portland, Seattle, LA, San Francisco, Oakland, and Williamsburg (aka: the Oakland of Brooklyn) have extremely high concentrations of Bob-types. In New York City, the current price/square foot of commercial real estate precludes you from opening up a business with low margins. This alone is a gigantic factor in killing the concept of the refill. But beyond this, people who rent 1 bedroom apartments for $2,500/month (on the low end) don't want to drink coffee that was brewed by the gallon. They want a cup that is custom made by a craftsman, just for them. They want a singular experience -- a teeny tiny consumable version of a bespoke suit.
If you go into any Blue Bottle, you will easily find a cup of coffee that costs $13. You can get one for maybe as low as $6, but that is the low low end of their price point. And when you walk into the place, it looks surgical and precise -- like they're about to split god damn subatomic particles. The real reason that the refill is nearly dead isn't just about real estate - it's about the high satisfaction threshold that seems to have taken hold of a lot of people. Not everyone (I'm talking to you, nascar watching lover of Wesley Snipes movies).
It's impossible to explain the death of the coffee refill without first explaining how globalization, interest rates, real estate prices, gentrification, and artisanal everything are entangled - kind of like Richard Feynman's major beef with trying to concisely explain how magnets work. But if you wanted to create a line up of likely coffee refill murder suspects, just go looking for all the Bobs.

Drop Seoi Nage
What is Seoi Nage?
In Judo, ippon seoi nage is a very dramatic throw. As in: someone literally goes flying over your shoulder like the arm of a trebuchet. There are several variants of this throw, but when jiu jitsu people do it - because of their crouched posture - they typically like to execute the knee drop version of it. That is exactly what I wound up doing one wednesday night during randori when I was partnered up with one of the brown belts. He’s younger than me, about the same height, and just a tiny bit heavier. This particular guy is very cagey, and when I train with him, I have to keep an eye out for his foot sweeps.
Getting grips
My partner and I spent the first minute or so just trying to get grips on eachother. Most people who don’t train judo or jiu jitsu think this is pointless and boring. I can understand why, it just looks like you’re trying to grab somebody. But there’s a great deal of skill to getting useful grips. We wound up having neutral grips - where we both had a sleeve and lapel. When this happens, I try to work my favored setup: osoto gari, then into either sasae or uchi mata. But my partner was stiff arming me to prevent me from really getting a good penetrating step. As I tried dealing with the stiff arm, I realized I could maybe elevate his arms every now and then by flaring my arm out to the side - as though I was strictly interested in getting around his stiff arm. My  real motive was to bring his right elbow up so that I could wedge my right forearm in there. I wound up feinting in this way about three times within a minute or so - just to tease it out and see if he’d react in the same way each time.
“Selling” the throw
In general, when you go into a throwing sequence where a secondary throw is attempted off of a failed first throw attempt, you MUST convincingly execute the first throw as if there were no follow-up throw behind it. I did that on wednesday. With my left hand grip on my partner’s right sleeve, I shucked my left arm further out to my left and also up. I did this to “break” my partner’s stiff arm so that it would look like another attempt at osoto gari. When his right arm and elbow came up, I snapped right into place, balled up underneath him, dropped to the floor, and gave a final push to slingshot my partner right over my head. Then, still holding on to my grips, I popped up into a tripod, started caging his torso in with my forearms, and put some good downward pressure on his chest with my head and shoulder. I immediately asked him…
“Was that legit”
To which he replied…
“That was 100% legit.”

Cast Iron Buttermilk Biscuits
Biscuits from scratch in 20 Minutes
Saturday morning, I slept in until 8:30, went downstairs to the kitchen, and saw a total of 3 bottles of Kate's Buttermilk in the fridge. I called an audible, and made a batch of biscuits from scratch.
I've been using this recipe for years, and the reason I love it is the fact that it has 4 ingredients, can be prepared quickly without much fuss, and makes a batch that perfectly fits inside a standard cast iron skillet - which most home cooks already own. Just make sure you have a clean smooth surface on which to work the dough (cutting board or granite countertop), and you can easily do this yourself.
Ingredients
2 cups of flour
5 tbsp of butter, extremely cold
1 tbs baking powder
Buttermilk (about a cup) - regular milk will work too
Preparation
Preheat oven to 450º
Combine flour and baking powder in a big bowl
Chop up the butter into very small cubes, and add to flour
Add the buttermilk/milk a bit at a time, and mix with a rubber spatula and your hands until the dough begins to fully clump together
Work the dough for no mother than 5 minutes - there should be no leftover loose flour in the bowl
Ensure that the ball of dough is wet to the touch, but not runny
Sprinkle additional flour on your work surface, and put your dough on top of this
Flour both sides of the dough
Using only your hands, shape the dough into a disc about an inch thick - the final size of the disc should fit inside a cast iron skillet (8" - 10" in diameter)
Cut out your biscuits - I use a very small glass to do this - whatever you choose, work quickly
Put all the biscuits into a cast iron pan at room temp
Place the pan into the oven, and let cook for 5 minutes
If you have convection, activate it for the next 5-7 minutes - otherwise just leave it in for about 5-7 minutes

The possibility of this would stop most people you dead in their fucking tracks.